Government Response | Royal
Commission Into The Robodebt
Scheme
November 2023
© Commonwealth of Australia 2023
ISBN: 978-1-925365-36-8 (Online)
ISBN: 978-1-925365-37-5 (Print)
Copyright Notice
With the exception of the Commonwealth Coat of Arms, this work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International licence (CC BY 4.0) (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
Third party copyright
Wherever a third party holds copyright in this material, the copyright remains with that party. Their
permission may be required to use the material. Please contact them directly.
Attribution
This publication should be attributed as follows:
© Commonwealth of Australia, Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, Royal Commission into
the Robodebt Scheme – Government Response.
Use of the Coat of Arms
The terms under which the Coat of Arms can be used are detailed on the following website:
https://pmc.gov.au/cca
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 2
Ministerial Foreword
“Robodebt was a crude and cruel mechanism, neither fair nor legal, and it made many people feel
like criminals. In essence, people were traumatised on the off-chance they might owe money. It
was a costly failure of public administration, in both human and economic terms.”1
With those words, the Royal Commission summed up the human tragedy that was the Robodebt
Scheme – a Budget measure introduced by the Abbott Government, expanded by the Turnbull
Government and defended, until the last minute, by the Morrison Government.
The Robodebt Scheme was not an innocent mistake.
The Royal Commission found that “[t]he beginning of 2017 was the point at which Robodebt’s
unfairness, probable illegality and cruelty became apparent”2. But, instead of abandoning or revising
the Scheme, the Royal Commission found that the path taken by the former government “was to
double down, to go on the attack in the media against those who complained and to maintain the
falsehood that in fact the system had not changed at all”3.
It was not until mid-2020 that the Robodebt Scheme finally came to an end. Not because the former
government saw the error of its ways or finally came to its senses – but because the Federal Court
found that the Scheme was unlawful. And yet to this day, people who served as senior Cabinet
ministers in the former government continue to maintain that “[w]hen the problems were brought to
the attention of the government at the time, the program was stopped”4. Such claims are
demonstrably false and an insult to the hundreds of thousands of Australians harmed by the
Robodebt Scheme – most of whom were targeted after the point at which the Royal Commission
found the Scheme’s “unfairness, probable illegality and cruelty became apparent”5. Those who shared
their stories with the Royal Commission and who campaigned tirelessly to raise the alarm bells about
the gross betrayal that was the Robodebt Scheme deserve better.
While ministers of the former government bear ultimate responsibility for the Robodebt Scheme, the
Royal Commission found serious failings within the Australian Public Service and with the institutional
checks and balances that should have put a stop to the Robodebt Scheme long before the Federal
Court found it unlawful.
Commissioner Holmes AC SC made 56 recommendations for reform.
We have worked through the Commissioner’s recommendations carefully. The Australian Government
has accepted or accepted in principle all 56 recommendations. This is backed up by resources to
ensure we deliver meaningful change. For some recommendations, we have gone further than the
1 Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme, Report, page xxix.
2 Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme, Report, page xxvii.
3 Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme, Report, page xxvii.
4 9news, 9 July 2023.
5 Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme, Report, page xxvii. Most people were targeted after
early 2017: Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme Exhibit 8538 – Response to NTG-0097 (681,292
reviews for EIC program from early 2017 and 247,459 reviews from October 2018 for CUPI program,
compared to 220,439 reviews prior to 2017 for OCI program).
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 3
Commissioner recommended. For others, we are implementing them in a way that achieves the
objective and ensures lasting effectiveness.
The Australian Government thanks Commissioner Holmes and her team for their dedication,
professionalism and forensic work on the Royal Commission.
To those who shared their stories with the Royal Commission – thank you.
Throughout the Royal Commission we saw courage, leadership and ethics on display from victims,
advocates and whistleblowers.
To the millions of Australians who interact with government services every day – we are committed to
putting you back at the centre of policy design and service delivery. We are here to serve you
respectfully and responsively, with your needs and aspirations at the heart of what we do.
To the Australian Public Servants delivering services, and to those developing policy and programs –
your work matters. Your integrity matters. Each day dedicated to public service is a day dedicated to
working for Australians and making their lives better.
The Australian Government and Ministers must act in the best interests of the Australian community.
Many of the Royal Commission’s findings align with the priorities and reforms the Australian
Government took to the Australian people at the last election – building trust in government,
investing in a capable public sector, delivering strong institutions and ensuring humans are put back
at the centre of human services and service delivery.
This Response reinforces the Australian Government’s reform agenda – an agenda founded on
integrity and a commitment to leave no-one behind. We are putting in place changes that will deliver
enduring benefits for all Australians. The Australian people deserve no less.
Attorney-General Minister for the Public Service
The Hon Mark Dreyfus KC MP Senator the Hon Katy Gallagher
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 4
Australian Government Response to the
Report of the Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme
On 7 July 2023, the Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme delivered its Report to the
Governor-General. It was tabled in the Australian Parliament the same day.
In the words of Commissioner Holmes AC SC, the Royal Commission “served the purpose of
bringing into the open an extraordinary saga, illustrating a myriad of ways that things can go
wrong through venality, incompetence and cowardice”6. The Commission produced 56 valuable
recommendations, which are principally directed at strengthening the Australian Public Service
and capability of oversight agencies. This document provides the Government’s response to
those recommendations.
However, before turning to the recommendations, it is important to place the Government’s
response in its proper context.
While important, the recommendations are not – in and of themselves – enough to prevent
another Robodebt Scheme. As Commissioner Holmes notes in the Preface to the Report,
“whether a public service can be developed with sufficient robustness to ensure that something of
the like of the Robodebt scheme could not occur again will depend on the will of the government
of the day, because culture is set from the top down”.7
The Government agrees.
The former government’s neglect of, and at times open hostility towards, our public institutions
was arguably unprecedented. Examples abound. The debasement of the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal, the defunding of the Administrative Review Council and the attempted
abolition of the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner and the Independent
National Security Legislation Monitor. The contempt for journalists, public interest reporting
and whistleblowers. The devaluing of the Australian Public Service. The list goes on and on.
Since the 2022 Federal Election, the Albanese Government has embarked on a series of reforms
to restore the public’s trust and faith in government and its institutions – reforms that put
people at the centre and promote integrity. This work includes:
• The establishment of the National Anti-Corruption Commission (NACC) with extensive
powers to investigate Commonwealth public officials, Ministers, their staff, and any person
that may adversely affect how a public official carries out their official duties honestly and
impartially.
6 Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme, Report, page 659.
7 Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme, Report, page iii.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 5
• The APS Reform agenda – putting strong foundations in place for a world-class and future
fit Australian Public Service that delivers better outcomes for the community and
contributes to a fairer and more inclusive Australia.
• The Prime Minister has put in place a robust Code of Conduct8 which requires Ministers to
act with due regard for integrity and legality, fairness, accountability, responsibility and the
public interest; and underscores that Ministers are accountable for the exercise of their
powers and functions to the Parliament and to the public.
• Strengthening Australia’s public sector whistleblowing framework and achieving strong,
effective and accessible whistleblower protections in two stages (with the first stage of
reform commencing from 1 July 2023).
• The abolition and replacement of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal – a landmark reform
that will lead to the creation of a new system of administrative review that is user-focussed,
efficient, accessible and fair.
In addition, in response to recommendations of the Royal Commission, the Government is
committed to:
• bringing forward legislative reforms to enhance the powers of the Commonwealth
Ombudsman and impose statutory obligations on officials responding to Commonwealth
Ombudsman investigations, and
• reinstating the Administrative Review Council to support ongoing improvements to
administrative decision-making across government.
A Government committed to a strong social security safety net - Re-humanising the delivery of
government payments
In the Royal Commission Report, Commissioner Holmes referred to the way in which
Australians receiving income support payments have been stigmatised in recent years,
explaining that they have been often made to feel “shame, oppression, isolation, and
dehumanisation”9. By no means the only example, but perhaps the most infamous, occurred in
December 2016 as the Robodebt scheme was being ramped up, when the then-Minister for
Human Services Alan Tudge said on national television:
“We will find you, we will track you down, and you will have to repay those debts, and you
may end up in prison.”10
The Royal Commission called for politicians to lead a change in attitudes to people receiving
income support payments, including abandoning the simple narrative of the taxpayer versus
8 Australian Government Code of Conduct for Ministers, 8 July 2022.
9 Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme, Report, page 330.
10 Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme, Report, page 140.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 6
the welfare recipient.11 The Commissioner remarked that the evidence before the Commission
was that fraud in the system was miniscule, ”but that is not the impression one would get from
what ministers responsible for social security payments have said over the years”12.
The social security system is a vital safety net, providing both income support and access to
services for Australians who need it. Many Australians need this support at different times in
their lives, for many different reasons. There is no shame in this.
The social security system safety net is also fundamental to our economy. The system allows
Australians to get on with their lives in the understanding that support is available if
circumstances change. This empowers people and helps build prosperity.
The Government is committed to putting people back at the centre of program design and
service delivery. The Department of Social Services and Services Australia are investing in more
training for officials and will seek regular feedback on service and program delivery from front-
line staff and the community.
The Government will continue to implement administrative changes to improve payment
accuracy and reduce the number of overpayments. The Government will also improve social
security debt arrangements to ensure that debt raising and recovery practices are timely, fair
and conducted with empathy and respect.
The deployment and adoption of safe and responsible automation and artificial intelligence
presents significant opportunities for Australia to improve economic and social outcomes.
Across society, the considered and ethical use of technology can help to deliver better services
to the community, including government services.
The Government will continue to implement the Digital Service Standard, which sets out best
practice principles for the inclusive, adaptable and ethical design and delivery of government
services. The Standard includes criteria that promote a human-centred and inclusive approach
to design.
In response to the Commission’s recommendations, the Government will also consider
opportunities to progress legislative reforms to ensure that government decisions involving
automation are made under a consistent legal framework which is clear and transparent, while
harnessing the speed, cost and efficiency benefits of technological advances in artificial
intelligence and automation. The Government has committed to developing a comprehensive
and consistent legal framework to support automated decision-making, consistent with the
principles recommended by the Royal Commission.
The Government also remains committed to ensuring Australians have greater control over
their own personal information. In the Government response to the Privacy Act Review the
Government has committed to reforms that will provide stronger privacy protections while
encouraging digital innovation.13
11 Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme, Report, page iii.
12 Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme, Report, page iii.
13 Government response to the Privacy Act Review Report | Attorney-General's Department (ag.gov.au).
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 7
Government Response to Recommendations
The Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme made 56 recommendations and one closing
observation.
In relation to the Commissioner’s closing observation, the Freedom of Information Act 1982 (Cth)
(FOI Act) promotes accountability in government decision-making by providing the community
with access to government documents, subject to some exemptions. The confidentiality of
Cabinet documents is one of those exemptions.
The Australian Government believes that it is critical that the Cabinet, the key decision-making
body of Government, is comprehensively informed in its deliberations. To achieve this, the
Cabinet must have the benefit of frank and fearless advice from Ministers and senior public
servants. The decisions taken by the Cabinet are collective. As set out in the Cabinet Handbook:
The principle of collective responsibility requires that ministers should be able to express
their views frankly in Cabinet meetings in the expectation that they can argue freely in
private while maintaining a united front in public when decisions have been reached. This
in turn requires that opinions expressed in the Cabinet and Cabinet Committees,
including in documents and any correspondence, are treated as confidential.14
For these reasons, the Government does not consider that section 34 of the FOI Act should be
repealed.
In relation to the Commissioner’s recommendations, the Australian Government accepts or
accepts in principle all 56 recommendations. Where a recommendation has been accepted in
principle, the Government is committed to achieve the objective of the recommendation but
has either identified an alternative means of doing so, or considers that further consideration is
needed.
14 Cabinet Handbook - 15th edition | PM&C (pmc.gov.au), para 21.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 8
Recommendation 10.1: Design policies and processes with emphasis on the people they are
meant to serve
Services Australia design its policies and processes with a primary emphasis on the recipients it
is meant to serve. That should entail:
• avoiding language and conduct which reinforces feelings of stigma and shame associated
with the receipt of government support when it is needed
• facilitating easy and efficient engagement with options of online, in person and telephone
communication which is sensitive to the particular circumstances of the customer cohort,
including itinerant lifestyles, lack of access to technology, lack of digital literacy and the
particular difficulties rural and remote living
• explaining processes in clear terms and plain language in communication to customers, and
• acting with sensitivity to financial and other forms of stress experienced by the customer
cohort and taking all practicable steps to avoid the possibility that interactions with the
government might exacerbate those stresses or introduce new ones.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of designing policies and government services that
focus on the needs of recipients. This includes making services as accessible as possible and
delivering them in a way that meets the needs of individuals and the community.
The Government will continue to improve the delivery of services for Australians. When
considering a change to a service, before policy, investment and service delivery decisions are
made, the Government will gather an evidence-based understanding of the needs of recipients,
which is based on the views of recipients, and explore how the proposed changes may impact
recipients. The Department of Social Services and Services Australia will work together to
ensure customer and staff feedback is considered in the design of policy and processes.
Priority 2 of the Government’s Australian Public Sector Reform agenda is to put people and
business at the centre of policy and services.15 In partnership with the broader APS and
government services users, Services Australia has developed a whole of service vision for user-
centred service excellence: “reliable and accessible services when and how you need them”16.
The vision supports coherent leadership in the design and delivery of government programs,
services and payments; service alignment; and shared execution. It is intended to complement
the service delivery principles, standards and charters of individual departments and agencies.
15 APS Reform outcomes and initiatives (apsreform.gov.au).
16 APS Vision for user-centred service excellence | APS Reform (apsreform.gov.au).
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 9
Recommendation 11.1: Clear documentation of exclusion criteria
Services Australia should ensure that for any cohort of recipients that is intended to be
excluded from a compliance process or activity, there is clear documentation of the exclusion
criteria, and, unless there is a technical reason it cannot be, the mechanism by which that is to
occur should be reflected in the relevant technical specification documents.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government supports the need for clear documentation that specifies the circumstances
when an individual may be excluded from a compliance process.
Services Australia will produce clear documentation for any exclusion criteria when any cohort
of recipients is intended to be excluded from compliance or debt related activities. This includes
recording any associated exclusions within any compliance activity business process
specifications and compliance program documents.
Recommendation 11.2: Identification of circumstances affecting the capacity to engage with
compliance activity
Services Australia should ensure that its processes and policies in relation to the identification
of potential vulnerabilities extend to the identification of circumstances affecting a recipient’s
capacity to engage with any form of compliance activity.
To this end, circumstances likely to affect a recipient’s capacity to engage with compliance
activities should be recorded on their file regardless of whether they are in receipt of a payment
that gives rise to mutual obligations.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government agrees that individual circumstances that might impact on an individual’s
capacity to engage with government services, or reviews of payments and services, should be
taken into account during service delivery and customer engagements.
Disclosure of individual circumstances is voluntary in most cases, particularly when this detail
may not be required to establish an entitlement to a payment or service. Noting this, in some
circumstances it may not be possible for delivery agencies to proactively identify all
circumstances that might affect a person’s ability to engage with a compliance activity.
In recognition, Services Australia has developed internal guidance to support staff to engage
with customers, build the agency’s capability to identify customers experiencing vulnerability,
and support customers to safely disclose their circumstances and access appropriate
information, services and support. Issued in July 2021, the ‘Our vulnerability strategy’ is being
implemented across Services Australia.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 10
Where an individual discloses a vulnerability, this will inform the way the agency engages with
the individual in the delivery of programs and services, including connecting the customer with
any additional support services. To support this, information about circumstances affecting a
recipient’s capacity to engage is recorded on customer records. This information is also
accessible to service delivery partners.
Services Australia will continue to engage with customers in a way that supports proper
consideration of individual circumstances, and to support customers to disclose any
vulnerabilities impacting them.
Recommendation 11.3: Engagement prior to removing a vulnerability indicator from a file
Services Australia should ensure that its processes and policies in relation to the identification
of potential vulnerabilities require staff to engage with a recipient prior to the removal of an
indicator on their file. For this purpose, Services Australia should remove any feature that would
allow for the automatic expiry of a vulnerability indicator (or equivalent flagging tool). An
indicator should only be removed where a recipient, or evidence provided to the Agency in
relation to the recipient, confirms that they are no longer suffering from the vulnerability to
which the indicator relates.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
Operational guidance material and the ‘Our vulnerability strategy’ support Services Australia
service officers to identify when customers’ circumstances should be recorded and updated on
a customer’s record. This includes when vulnerabilities are identified, require updates due to a
change in the customer’s circumstances, or are no longer impacting the customer.
Records held by Services Australia contain notes that alert staff to circumstances where a
recipient is experiencing difficulties that might affect their ability to meet mutual obligation
requirements. Where an individual discloses a vulnerability, staff will use this knowledge to
tailor the discussion and interaction, including the promotion of appropriate programs and
services, and connect the customer to specialist supports and/or referrals to local service
providers. To support this, information about circumstances affecting a person’s capacity to
engage in mutual obligation requirements is recorded on customer files.
Notes are generally applied on the basis of information provided by individuals through their
engagement with the agency. A record of a person’s circumstances is maintained on their
customer file and accessible if they have future interactions with the agency.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 11
Recommendation 11.4: Consideration of vulnerabilities affected by each compliance program,
including consultation with advocacy bodies
Services Australia should incorporate a process in the design of compliance programs to
consider and document the categories of vulnerable recipients who may be affected by the
program, and how those recipients will be dealt with. Services Australia should consult
stakeholders (including peak advocacy bodies) as part of this process to ensure that adequate
provision is made to accommodate vulnerable recipients who may encounter particular
difficulties engaging with the program.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of considering an individual’s capacity to engage
with government services and any reviews of their circumstances that might impact eligibility
for a payment or services.
Services Australia uses established forums to support engagements with advocacy groups
including the National Multicultural Advisory Group, Disability Peak Bodies, Stakeholder
Consultative Group and the Civil Society Advisory Group. Engagements through these forums
have informed changes to the agency’s service delivery and support services.
Services Australia will continue to seek advice and input from civil society stakeholders to
improve service delivery, particularly where changes are being made and there are
opportunities for co-design.
Recommendation 12.1: Easier engagement with Centrelink
Options for easier engagement with Centrelink by advocacy groups – for example, through the
creation of a national advocate’s line – should be considered.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises the important role advocates play in the administration of
government services and undertakes regular engagements with peak advocacy groups.
Services Australia will actively identify opportunities to engage with advocacy groups. To
support engagement between Services Australia and advocacy groups, the agency has a
number of established forums through which advocacy groups can engage directly with the
agency. These forums provide a channel for advocacy groups to raise concerns and provide
feedback to the agency.
Services Australia will pilot an ‘advocates’ channel for legal advocates. This pilot will help inform
the suitability of channels for advocacy groups acting on behalf of vulnerable customers, and to
inform a longer-term scalable solution. The pilot will be progressed in conjunction with
Economic Justice Australia (EJA).
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 12
Recommendation 12.2: Customer experience reference group
The government should consider establishing a customer experience reference group, which
would provide streamlined insight to government regarding the experiences of people
accessing income support.
The Government accepts in principle this recommendation.
Government agencies provide vital services and information for the community. Service design
should respond to community need, and the methods of service delivery should be as effective
and efficient as possible.
In partnership with the broader APS and government services users, Services Australia has
developed a whole of service vision for user-centred service excellence: “reliable and accessible
services when and how you need them”17. This vision forms part of Priority 2 of the
Government’s Australian Public Sector Reform agenda, and puts people and business at the
centre of policy and services. The vision supports coherent leadership in the design and delivery
of government programs, services and payments; service alignment; and shared execution. It is
intended to complement the service delivery principles, standards and charters of individual
departments and agencies.
The Australian Public Sector Reform Office and Services Australia are also partnering to develop
whole-of-government Service Design Standards to support agencies to design, administer and
improve new and existing services and payments. The Standards will be evidence-based and
informed by the needs and expectations of the Australian community.
Recommendation 12.3: Consultation
Peak advocacy bodies should be consulted prior to the implementation of projects involving
the modification of the social security system.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government will consult with peak advocacy groups when implementing modifications to
the social security system.
Building and expanding on existing engagement mechanisms, including with organisations like
Economic Justice Australia and the Australian Council of Social Service, the Department of
Social Services and Services Australia will engage with peak advocacy bodies to determine the
most effective way to seek their views on the design and implementation of projects where
there are likely to be implications for users of the social security system.
17 APS Vision for user-centred service excellence | APS Reform (apsreform.gov.au).
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 13
Recommendation 12.4: Regard for funding for legal aid commissions and community legal
centres
When it next conducts a review of the National Legal Assistance Partnership, the
Commonwealth should have regard, in considering funding for legal aid commissions and
community legal centres, to the importance of the public interest role played by those services
as exemplified in their work during the Scheme.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
Legal assistance plays a vital role in ensuring more equal access to the justice system which is
fundamental to our democratic society and the rule of law. Not only does legal assistance
facilitate improved outcomes for individuals, it also generates broader benefits to society.
The independent review of the National Legal Assistance Partnership 2020-25 (NLAP)
commenced in June 2023.18 The Terms of Reference for the review are broad, and require the
review to evaluate whether the objectives, outcomes and outputs of the NLAP have been
achieved.19
The Issues Paper published by the independent reviewer states that recommendation 12.4 is
within the scope of the Terms of Reference, and will be considered as part of the review.20 The
findings and recommendations of the review will inform future funding arrangements for legal
assistance.
Recommendation 13.1: Consultation process
Services Australia should put in place processes for genuine and receptive consultation with
front-line staff when new programs are being designed and implemented.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government supports undertaking consultation with front-line staff when designing and
implementing new programs, noting their expertise in engaging with customers.
Services Australia will ensure the experiences of front-line staff are sought and fed into design
practice and service delivery policy.
18 Independent Review of the National Legal Assistance Partnership (ag.gov.au).
19 The Independent Review of the NLAP (nlapreview.com.au).
20 Issues Paper | NLAP review (nlapreview.com.au).
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 14
Recommendation 13.2: Feedback processes
Better feedback processes should be put in place so that front-line staff can communicate their
feedback in an open and consultative environment. Management should have constructive
processes in place to review and respond to staff feedback.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government commits to ensuring agencies have processes in place to gather feedback
from front-line staff, noting their first-hand experiences in engaging with the community.
Services Australia has a variety of mechanisms in place for staff to provide feedback, given the
variability of services provided by the agency. Services Australia is committed to supporting
staff input into the delivery of programs, both specific and systemic delivery considerations, and
insights on emerging issues for policy design and program delivery.
Recommendation 13.3: “Face-to-face” support
More “face-to-face” customer service support options should be available for vulnerable
recipients needing support.
The Government accepts in principle this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of designing services to meet the needs of
individuals, particularly vulnerable recipients. This includes making services as accessible as
possible, including for individuals located in remote areas, through the preferred channel of the
individual.
The Australian Public Sector Reform Office and Services Australia are partnering to develop
whole-of-government service delivery attributes and Service Design Standards to support
agencies to design and administer new and existing services and payments. The Standards will
be evidence-based and informed by the needs and expectations of the Australian community.
The Government recognises the importance of having face-to-face services available to
Australians when required. Services Australia has been transforming its face-to-face services
since 2019-20. Improvements have been made to the service environment including in person
and online. Services Australia will continue to adopt a customer-centred approach. The
ongoing efforts to transform service delivery will be directed toward better assisting customers
to navigate services tailored to their needs, including through identifying opportunities to
engage and collaborate with government service delivery partners and support more
customers to access government services from a single location.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 15
Recommendation 13.4: Increased number of social workers
Increased social worker support (for both recipients and staff), and better referral processes to
enable this support, should be implemented.
The Government accepts in principle this recommendation.
The Government recognises the important role social workers play in supporting our
community, and connecting Australians with services that support their needs.
The Services Australia Social Work Servicing Strategy (2021-2025) outlines how the agency is
transforming the way it delivers social work services. The Strategy was developed in
consultation with Services Australia social workers, and draws on their expertise and experience.
The vision identified in the Strategy is to ensure “a progressive social work service committed to
social justice and helping individuals, families and communities so people can get on with their
lives” consistent with the agency’s Master Plan, and to provide world-class services to citizens
through increased social worker accessibility.
To maximise access to social work support for customers and staff, Services Australia is also
exploring additional delivery methods to support connections with customers and continues to
respond to customer needs through their preferred method of contact.
Recommendation 15.1: Legislative change better defined in New Policy Proposals
The Budget Process Operational Rules should include a requirement that all New Policy
Proposals contain a statement as to whether the proposal requires legislative change in order
to be lawfully implemented, as distinct from legislative change to authorise expenditure.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
In providing advice to Cabinet, Ministers, departments and agencies should indicate whether a
new policy proposal will require legislative change in order for it to be lawfully implemented, in
addition to giving advice on whether legislation is required to authorise expenditure. In
circumstances where it has not been possible to determine whether legislative change is
required, this should also be clearly stated. Relevant Cabinet procedures will be updated to
reflect this.
This recommendation will be implemented by the Department of the Prime Minister and
Cabinet, the Department of Finance and the Treasury, in consultation with the
Attorney-General’s Department.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 16
Recommendation 15.2: Include legal advices with New Policy Proposals
The Budget Process Operational Rules should include a requirement that any legal advice
(either internal or external) relating to whether the proposal requires legislative change in order
to be implemented be included with the New Policy Proposal in any versions of the Portfolio
Budget Submission circulated to other agencies or Cabinet ministers.
The Government accepts in principle this recommendation.
The Government agrees that Cabinet should be clearly informed of identifiable legal issues
associated with the implementation of new policy proposals. The Government considers that
clear, concise and succinct summaries of legal issues are likely to be of greater assistance to
entities and Ministers than copies of entire legal advices. Relevant Cabinet procedures will be
updated to reflect this.
This recommendation will be implemented by the Department of the Prime Minister and
Cabinet, the Department of Finance and the Treasury, in consultation with the
Attorney-General’s Department.
Recommendation 15.3: Australian Government Solicitor statement in the NPP
The Budget Process Operational Rules should include a requirement that where legal advice
has been given in relation to whether the proposal requires legislative change in order to be
implemented, the New Policy Proposal includes a statement as to whether the Australian
Government Solicitor has reviewed and agreed with the advice.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
Sponsoring Ministers and entities are responsible for ensuring that they present clear
information on what is required to implement a new policy proposal. Where legal advice is
provided on a new policy proposal, Cabinet should receive complete and accurate information,
particularly regarding whether or not the Australian Government Solicitor has reviewed and
agreed with any legal advice on whether legislative change is required. Relevant Cabinet
procedures will be updated to reflect this.
This recommendation will be implemented by the Department of the Prime Minister and
Cabinet, the Department of Finance and the Treasury, in consultation with the
Attorney-General’s Department.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 17
Recommendation 15.4: Standard, specific language on legal risks in the NPP
The standard language used in the NPP Checklist should be sufficiently specific to make it
obvious on the face of the document what advice is being provided, in respect of what legal
risks and by whom it is being provided.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
Cabinet should receive clear and accurate advice on new policy proposals, to ensure it fully
understands associated legal issues and risks. Relevant Cabinet procedures will be updated to
make it clear what legal advice has been obtained, in respect of what risks, and by whom it was
provided. The updates will provide clearer information on legislative authority issues relating to
spending, and on legal issues relating to other aspects of the proposal.
This recommendation will be implemented by the Department of the Prime Minister and
Cabinet, in consultation with the Department of Finance, the Treasury and the
Attorney-General’s Department.
Recommendation 15.5: Documented assumptions for compliance Budget measures
That in developing compliance Budget measures, Services Australia and DSS document the
basis for the assumptions and inputs used, including the sources of the data relied on.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
All Ministers, departments and agencies are expected and required to comply with the rules
outlined in the Cabinet Handbook and the Budget Process Operational Rules when developing
new policy proposals and measures with financial implications.
The Department of Social Services and Services Australia will ensure budget initiatives are
progressed in consultation with the Department of Finance, and in compliance with the Budget
Process Operational Rules. Data sources will be identified, and assumptions will be required to
be documented and provided in a transparent manner.
The Digital Transformation Agency is also assisting agencies articulate and measure the
benefits of investment in technology, including as they relate to technology-enabled
compliance measures.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 18
Recommendation 15.6: Documentation on the basis for assumptions provided to Finance
That in seeking agreement from Finance for costings of compliance Budget measures, Services
Australia and DSS provide Finance with documentation setting out the basis for the
assumptions and inputs used, including related data sources, to allow Finance to properly
investigate and test those assumptions and inputs.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
All Ministers, departments and agencies are expected and required to comply with the rules
outlined within the Cabinet Handbook and the Budget Process Operational Rules when
developing new policy proposals and measures with financial implications.
The Department of Social Services and Services Australia will ensure budget initiatives are
progressed in consultation with the Department of Finance, and in compliance with the Budget
Process Operational Rules. Data sources will be identified, and assumptions and inputs will be
provided for compliance measures. These will be required to be documented and provided in a
transparent manner.
Recommendation 16.1: Legal advice on end-to-end data exchanges
The Commonwealth should seek legal advice on the end-to-end data exchange processes
which are currently operating between Services Australia and the ATO to ensure they are lawful.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The collection, use, storage and disclosure of personal information is fundamental to the
effective administration of government agencies and departments. It is therefore critical the
public have trust and confidence that agencies and departments are adhering to the robust
legislative frameworks in place which protect personal privacy.
Government agencies and departments have obligations to protect an individual’s information
under the Privacy Act 1988 (Cth), the Australian Privacy Principles and relevant guidelines issued
by the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner. Recognising the importance the
protection of personal information has in the administration of the tax and social security
systems, the Taxation Administration Act 1953 (Cth) and Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
(Cth) also contain provisions that protect an individual’s information.
The Australian Taxation Office and Services Australia have obtained independent, external legal
advice in respect of the Pay As You Go (PAYG) and Single Touch Payroll (STP) data exchange
programs, which confirm that both agencies are complying with the required legislative
frameworks governing each aspect of the data exchange, specifically, the confidentiality and
Tax File Number (TFN) provisions in the Taxation Administration Act 1953, the confidentiality
provisions of the Social Security (Administration) Act 1999, and the Privacy Act 1988.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 19
Recommendation 16.2: Review and strengthen governance of data-matching programs
The ATO and DHS should take immediate steps to review and strengthen their operational
governance practices as applied to jointly conducted data-matching programs. This should
include:
• reviews to ensure that all steps and operations relating to existing or proposed data-
matching programs are properly documented
• a review of all existing framework documents for existing or proposed data-matching
programs
• a review of the operations of the ATO/DHS Consultative Forum and the ATO/DHS Data
Management Forum
• a review of the existing Head Agreement/s, Memoranda of Understanding and Services
Schedule
• a joint review of any existing or proposed data-matching program protocols to ensure they
are legally compliant in respect of their provision for the data exchanges contemplated for
the relevant data-matching program.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance governance frameworks have in providing an
effective level of oversight of joint programs operating between government agencies. These
frameworks provide agencies with appropriate issues resolution pathways, clearly articulate the
objectives of the arrangement and outline the expectations and responsibilities of each party.
The Australian Taxation Office and Services Australia are reviewing all existing data exchanges
operating between the agencies to ensure all legal and ethical requirements are met, and that
the governance arrangements and supporting framework documentation, including
Memoranda of Understanding and joint forum terms of reference, are in place and accurately
reflect the processes and procedures of the exchange.
The Australian Taxation Office and Services Australia will review new and existing data sharing
arrangements in line with guidance material issued by the Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner and the Office of the National Data Commissioner, and will consult with these
oversight bodies where required.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 20
Recommendation 17.1: Reform of legislation and implementation of regulation
The Commonwealth should consider legislative reform to introduce a consistent legal
framework in which automation in government services can operate. Where automated
decision-making is implemented:
• there should be a clear path for those affected by decisions to seek review
• departmental websites should contain information advising that automated decision-making
is used and explaining in plain language how the process works
• business rules and algorithms should be made available, to enable independent expert
scrutiny.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The safe and responsible development and deployment of automated decision-making
provides important opportunities to deliver timely and efficient services for Australians.
The Government will consider opportunities for legislative reform to introduce a consistent
legal framework in which automation in government services can operate ethically, without bias
and with appropriate safeguards, which will include consideration of:
• review pathways for those affected by decisions, and
• transparency about the use of automated decision-making, and how such decision-
making processes operate, for persons affected by decisions and to enable independent
scrutiny.
The reforms agreed to in the Government response to the Privacy Act Review Report, released
28 September 2023, will also increase the transparency and integrity of decisions made using
automated decision-making that uses personal information. Privacy policies will be required to
set out the types of personal information used in automated decision-making systems that
have a legal or similarly significant effect on an individual’s rights. There will also be a right for
individuals to request meaningful information about how these decisions are made.21
21 Government response to the Privacy Act Review Report, 2023.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 21
Recommendation 17.2: Establishment of a body to monitor and audit automated decision-
making
The Commonwealth should consider establishing a body, or expanding an existing body, with
the power to monitor and audit automate decision-making processes with regard to their
technical aspects and their impact in respect of fairness, the avoiding of bias, and client
usability.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government agrees that ethical considerations and principles of administrative law must be
taken into account in the design of automated decision-making processes and there should be
proper oversight of these arrangements.
The Government will ensure there is appropriate oversight of the use of automation in service
delivery. This includes oversight of technical aspects to identify potential bias and ensure the
use of automated decision-making or artificial intelligence is ethical and in accordance with
legislative protections. In implementing this recommendation, the Government will consider
establishing a body, or expanding the functions of an existing body, with the power to monitor
and audit automated decision-making processes.
The Government will examine existing regulatory frameworks that provide safeguards for
artificial intelligence and automated decision-making to ensure a consistent legal, ethical and
governance framework in which automation in government services can operate with
appropriate safeguards.
The Government commits to ensuring new technologies are integrated in a safe and
responsible manner. The Government's Data and Digital Government Strategy22 includes a
Government commitment to empower departments and agencies to safely engage with
emerging technologies like artificial intelligence and ensure they remain transparent about how
these technologies are used in the functioning of government and the delivery of government
programs, payments and services. Governance of automated decision-making will also be
further considered as part of current work to develop appropriate whole-of-government
assurance and governance of artificial intelligence.
22 Data and Digital Government Strategy, 2023.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 22
Recommendation 18.1: Comprehensive debt recovery policy for Services Australia
Services Australia should develop a comprehensive debt recovery management policy which
among other things should incorporate the Guideline for Collectors and Creditors’ issued by
the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) and the Australian Securities
and Investments Commission (ASIC). Examples of such documents already exist at both federal
and state levels. Any such policy should also prescribe how Services Australia undertakes to
engage with debtors, including that staff must:
• ensure any debt recovery action is always ethical, proportionate, consistent and transparent
• treat all recipients fairly and with dignity, taking each person’s circumstances into account
before commencing recovery action
• subject to any express legal authority to do so, refrain from commencing or continuing
recovery action while a debt is being reviewed or disputed, and
• in accordance with legal authority, consider and respond appropriately and proportionately
to cases of hardship.
Services Australia should ensure that recipients are given ample and appropriate opportunities
to challenge, review and seek guidance on any proposed debts before they are referred for
debt recovery.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government commits to ensuring income support and other services are available to
vulnerable Australians when they need it, without stigma; and that debt recovery practices are
undertaken in a manner that is fair, empathetic and respectful, and takes into account individual
circumstances.
The Government will continue to implement changes to improve debt recovery policy and
practice, within the underpinning legal framework.
Recommendation 18.2: Reinstate the limitation of six years on debt recovery
The Commonwealth should repeal s 1234B of the Social Security Act and reinstate the effective
limitation period of six years for the bringing of proceedings to recover debts under Part 5.2 of
the Act formerly contained in s 1232 and s 1236 of that Act, before repeal of the relevant sub-
sections by the Budget Savings (Omnibus) Act (No 55) 2016 (Cth). There is no reason that
current and former social security recipients should be on any different footing from other
debtors.
The Government accepts in principle this recommendation.
The Government will improve social security debt arrangements and is committed to ensuring
debt raising and recovery is undertaken in a timely, fair and respectful manner.
Any reform to the approach of raising and recovering social security debts should be
undertaken in a systematic way, with careful consideration of the unique circumstances of social
security debtors. The Government will carefully consider options for legislative reform, including
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 23
appropriate statutory limitation periods for the raising and recovery of social security debts to
comprehensively address the issues identified by the Royal Commission.
The Government is committed to improving social security debt arrangements to ensure that
debt recovery practices are clear and conducted in a respectful manner.
The Government will continue to implement administrative changes to make the system fairer
for those who incur debts, and to reduce the likelihood of recipients incurring a debt in the first
place.
If social security recipients do not agree with a debt decision, they can seek an explanation
from Services Australia and/or apply for a formal review. Information about opportunities for
review is included in Services Australia debt notices and is also available on the Services
Australia website. In addition, social security recipients may request an appointment with a
Services Australia social worker who can refer them to financial counselling and support
services.
Measures to improve the accuracy of social security payments are being implemented as a
priority for the Government, reducing the likelihood of debts being incurred due to
overpayments. These include the use of Single Touch Payroll (STP) for reporting of employment
income. STP has now been implemented for the majority of employers, enabling the pre-filling
of social security recipients’ employment income reports, and supporting faster and more
accurate actual income reporting.
The Australian National Audit Office has also recently completed a performance audit on the
accuracy and timeliness of income support, and Services Australia and the Department of Social
Services are implementing the agreed recommendations.
Recommendation 19.1: Selection of chief counsel
The selection panel for the appointment of chief counsel of Services Australia or DSS (chief
counsel being the head of the entity’s legal practice) should include as a member of the panel,
the Australian Government Solicitor.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises the specialist input the Australian Government Solicitor or their
representative could provide in the selection of the chief legal officers of Services Australia and
the Department of Social Services.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 24
Recommendation 19.2: Training for lawyers – Services Australia
Services Australia should provide regular training to its in-house lawyers on the core duties and
responsibilities set out in the Legal Practice Standards, including:
• an emphasis on the duty to avoid any compromise to their integrity and professional
independence and the challenges that may be presented to a government lawyer in fulfilling
that obligation.
• appropriate statutory and case authority references in advice writing.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of providing training and development to its in-
house legal officers, to ensure that they are able to deliver services in line with Legal Practice
Standards.
Services Australia legal staff are subject to Legal Practice Directions issued by the Chief Counsel
which set out the obligations and requirements of agency legal staff, including a requirement to
undertake regular training. In addition, performance agreements for all Services Australia legal
staff will require staff to comply with the Legal Practice Directions.
Services Australia has also engaged with the Department of Social Services and other agencies
within the Social Services portfolio on shared training for legal staff across the social services
portfolio. Areas in focus include training on legal ethics, obligations of in-house lawyers and
principles of advice writing. This training is additional to the obligations of in-house lawyers to
complete mandatory Continuing Legal Education (CLE) to maintain their practising certificates.
Recommendation 19.3: Legal practice standards – Social Services
DSS should develop Legal Practice Standards which set out the core duties and responsibilities
of all legal officers working at DSS.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of having clear Legal Practice Standards in place
that outline the core duties and responsibilities of in-house government lawyers.
The Department of Social Services (DSS) has developed a new package of legal practice
governance documents, which include updates to the Legal Practice Manual issued by the Chief
Counsel that set out the core duties and responsibilities of all legal officers working at DSS.
Compliance with these duties and obligations will be included in the performance agreements
for all legal staff.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 25
Recommendation 19.4: Training for lawyers – Social Services
DSS should provide regular training on the core duties and responsibilities to be set out in the
Legal Practice Standards which should include: an emphasis on the duty to avoid any
compromise to their integrity and professional independence and the challenges that may be
presented to a government lawyer in fulfilling that obligation appropriate statutory and case
authority references in advice writing.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of providing training and development to its in-
house legal officers, to ensure that they are able to deliver services in line with Legal Practice
Standards.
The Department of Social Services (DSS) is establishing a regular training program for in-house
lawyers that will include a focus on core studies and responsibilities laid down in DSS Legal
Practice Standards. DSS is also actively taking steps to engage providers to deliver integrity and
professional independence training for all lawyers in the Department. This training will be in
addition to the lawyers’ obligation to complete Continuing Legal Education (CLE) associated
with maintaining the required Practising Certificate.
DSS has also engaged with Services Australia and other agencies within the social services
portfolio regarding the opportunities for shared training for legal staff across the social services
portfolio. Areas in focus include training on legal ethics, obligations of in-house lawyers and
principles of advice writing.
Recommendation 19.5: Draft advice – Social Services
DSS should issue a further direction providing that, if the administering agency decides that a
draft advice need not be provided in final form, that decision and the reasons for it must be
documented. One of those steps – finalisation, or a documented decision against finalisation –
should have been taken within three months of the receipt of the draft advice.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government agrees that legal advice cannot be disregarded because it is in draft form and
it is never acceptable for legal advice not to be finalised on the basis that the advice may be
inconvenient or unwelcome.
The Secretary of the Department of Social Services issued guidance on the practice of
requesting, clarifying and finalising legal advice on 14 November 2022. The Chief Counsel of the
Department of Social Services has also issued Legal Services Practice guidance on obtaining
external legal advice, including draft advice, clearly articulating that external advice is not to be
left in draft form indefinitely, but should be finalised as soon as is practicable.
The Government also considers it is important that the treatment of draft legal advice is
consistent across agencies. On 15 May 2023, the Secretary of the Attorney-General’s
Department circulated initial guidance to all the heads of legal services functions across the APS
on the use of draft legal advice within government, making it clear that legal advice cannot be
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 26
disregarded because it is in draft form and that it is never acceptable for legal advice not to be
finalised on the basis that the advice may be inconvenient or unwelcome. The
Attorney-General’s Department is reviewing the guidance in light of the observations made by
the Royal Commission.
Recommendation 19.6: Draft advice – Services Australia
Services Australia should issue a direction that legal advice is to be left in draft form only to the
extent that the administrative step of finalising it has not yet been undertaken by lawyers or
there are remaining questions to be answered in relation to the issues under consideration and
that, if the administering agency decides that a draft advice need not be provided in final form,
that decision and the reasons for it must be documented. One of those steps – finalisation, or a
documented decision against finalisation – should have been taken within three months of the
receipt of the draft advice.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government agrees that legal advice cannot be disregarded because it is in draft form and
it is never acceptable for legal advice not to be finalised on the basis that the advice may be
inconvenient or unwelcome.
The Chief Counsel of Services Australia has issued internal Legal Practice Standards on
obtaining external legal advice, including draft advice. Legal Officers are required to have
regard to the Chief Counsel’s expectation that draft legal advice will ordinarily be finalised, that
legal advice cannot be disregarded on the basis that it is in draft form, that it is never
acceptable for draft legal advice not to be finalised because it may be unwelcome or
inconvenient, and that draft legal advice should be finalised before it is relied upon to make
decisions. Where finalisation of draft advice is not practicable, Legal Officers must place a file
note on the relevant file confirming the reason the advice was not finalised.
The Government also considers it is important that the treatment of draft legal advice is
consistent across agencies. On 15 May 2023, the Secretary of the Attorney-General’s
Department circulated initial guidance to all the heads of legal services functions across the APS
on the use of draft legal advice within government, making it clear that legal advice cannot be
disregarded because it is in draft form and that it is never acceptable for legal advice not to be
finalised on the basis that the advice may be inconvenient or unwelcome. The
Attorney-General’s Department is reviewing the guidance in light of the observations made by
the Royal Commission.
Recommendation 19.7: The Directions
The Legal Services Directions 2017 should be reviewed and simplified.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Legal Services Directions 2017 play an important function setting out the requirements for
sound practice in the provision of legal services to the Australian Government.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 27
The Government will review and redraft aspects of the Legal Services Directions 2017 with a view
to ensuring the Directions are fit-for-purpose in supporting agencies to undertake
Commonwealth legal work and manage legal risk in an effective, consistent and
whole-of-Commonwealth manner.
The Attorney-General’s Department will lead implementation of this recommendation.
Recommendation 19.8: Office of Legal Services Coordination to assist agencies with significant
issues reporting
The OLSC should provide more extensive information and feedback to assist agencies with the
significant legal issues process.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises the important function that the Office of Legal Services
Coordination performs for the APS and supports the provision of any guidance that would
further strengthen the reporting of significant legal issues.
The significant issues reporting and settlement regime in the Legal Services Directions 2017
allows the Attorney-General as First Law Officer to have visibility of, and the ability to influence,
key legal matters across the Commonwealth. The Attorney-General’s Department will review its
practices to provide improved guidance and support to better enable agencies to identify
significant issues arising in their legal work, and to provide the relevant information at the
appropriate time to support the Attorney-General perform the functions of the First Law
Officer.
The Government is providing $5.2 million over the forward estimates and $1.1 million per year,
ongoing, including additional ongoing staff for the Attorney-General’s Department, to provide
improved support and guidance on the significant legal issues regime.
Recommendation 19.9: Recording of reporting obligations
The OLSC should ensure a documentary record is made of substantive inquiries made with and
responses given by agencies concerning their obligations to report significant issues pursuant
to para 3.1 of the Directions.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Attorney-General’s Department will build on existing work to ensure it has appropriate
processes to document and record all inquiries with agencies on whether a legal issue is
required to be reported.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 28
Recommendation 19.10: The Directions 2
The OLSC should issue guidance material on the obligations to consult on and disclose advice
in clause 10 of the Legal Services Directions 2017.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises the important function that the Office of Legal Services
Coordination performs for the Australian Public Service and supports the provision of any
guidance that would further strengthen the reporting of significant legal issues.
The Attorney-General’s Department will develop new guidance material to support agencies'
understanding of and compliance with the obligations in paragraph 10 of the Legal Services
Directions 2017 on the consultation on and sharing of legal advices.
Recommendation 19.11: Resourcing the Office of Legal Services Coordination
The OLSC should be properly resourced to deliver these functions.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises the important function that the Office of Legal Services
Coordination performs for the Australian Public Service and that it be properly resourced.
The Office of Legal Services Coordination in the Attorney-General’s Department performs a
critical function in supporting the Attorney-General as First Law Officer in having overarching
responsibility for all Commonwealth legal work, and supporting agencies to manage legal risk
in a collaborative and whole-of-Commonwealth manner. The Government will ensure that
OLSC is adequately resourced to perform its functions, which will enable it to provide the
support necessary for agencies to manage legal issues effectively.
Recommendation 19.12: Chief counsel
The Australian Government Legal Service’s General Counsel Charter be amended to place a
positive obligation on chief counsel to ensure that the Legal Services Directions 2017 (Cth) are
complied with and to document interactions with OLSC about inquiries made, and responses
given, concerning reporting obligations under those Directions.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises that the General Counsel or Chief Counsel in a government agency
plays an important role in the management of Commonwealth legal risk.
The General Counsel Charter, established in January 2022, establishes a set of common
expectations for General Counsel, and creates a relationship between General Counsel and the
Attorney-General’s Department Secretary as the head of the Australian Government Legal
Service (AGLS).
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 29
The Attorney-General’s Department, in consultation with the AGLS Board and General Counsel,
will review and update the General Counsel Charter in light of the recommendations and
observations of the Royal Commission.
Recommendation 19.13: Review of the Bilateral Management Agreement
The revised Bilateral Management Agreement should set out the requirement to consult on
and disclose legal advices between the two agencies where any intersection of work is
identified.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
In April 2023, the Secretary of the Department of Social Services and the Chief Executive Officer
of Services Australia executed a new Head Agreement to support the Bilateral Management
Arrangement. Under that agreement both committed to reviewing all Protocols, Service
Arrangements and Service Schedules entered into under the former Head Agreement.
Work is underway by both agencies to include the requirement to consult on and disclose
relevant legal advices in an updated Protocol. In conjunction, Chief Counsels within the social
services portfolio have updated the advice-sharing arrangements agreed in 2021. Chief
Counsels also have regular dialogue on significant legal issues and portfolio-level responses,
including through a regular Chief Counsel Forum.
Recommendation 20.1: AAT cases with significant legal and policy issues
Services Australia should put in place a system for identifying AAT cases which raise significant
legal and policy issues and ensuring that they are brought to the attention of senior DSS and
Services Australia officers.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of this recommendation and supports the work
underway within the Department of Social Services (DSS) and Services Australia to strengthen
their processes and ensure greater transparency in the reporting of information relating to
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) cases to senior officers of both agencies.
Services Australia and DSS legal areas are updating their Standing Operational Statement which
prescribes arrangements to ensure matters which raise significant legal and policy issues are
brought to the attention of senior officials, and are also raised with the Office of Legal Services
Coordination when required.
Services Australia will also review any revised settings and approaches required, including
systems implementation, to support the establishment of the new federal administrative review
body, and its procedures, once established.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 30
Recommendation 20.2: Training for DHS legal officers
Services Australia legal officers whose duties involve the preparation of advices in relation to
AAT decisions should receive training which emphasises the requirements of the Standing
Operational Statements in relation to appeal recommendations and referral to DSS; Services
Australia’s obligations as a model litigant; and the obligation to pay due regard to AAT
decisions and directions.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of providing training and development to legal
officers, to ensure that they are able to deliver services in line with the Commonwealth model
litigant obligations.
The Australian Government Legal Service (AGLS) is the overarching, formal professional
network for government lawyers. The AGLS supports coherent and consistent legal services
across the Commonwealth and provides a professional network for collaboration including on
training modules and legal standards. In addition, the Statement of Expectations of Australian
Government Lawyers sets out the expectations of government lawyers and provides guidance
for government lawyers in fulfilling their duties in a government context.23
Services Australia will update its training packages and provide specific training to lawyers
within the Litigation Branch on the Model Litigant Obligations under the Legal Services
Directions 2017, as well as the Standing Operational Statement with the Department of Social
Services (DSS).
DSS has also engaged with Services Australia and other agencies within the social services
portfolio regarding the opportunities for shared training for legal staff across the social services
portfolio. The initial focus of discussion will be for training in areas of legal ethics, obligations of
in-house lawyers and principles of advice writing. In addition, all in-house lawyers admitted to
practice are required to complete mandatory Continuing Legal Education and provide monthly
reports of active significant matters.
Recommendation 20.3: Identifying significant AAT decisions
DSS should establish, or if it is established, maintain, a system for identifying all significant AAT
decisions and bringing them to the attention of its secretary.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of this recommendation and supports the work
presently underway within the Department of Social Service (DSS) and Services Australia to
strengthen their processes and ensure greater transparency in the reporting of information
relating to Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) cases to senior officers of both agencies.
23 Statement of expectations of Australian Government lawyers. February 2022.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 31
Identification and reporting on significant AAT decisions is governed by Services Australia and
the Department of Social Services Standing Operational Statement. The Statement requires
Services Australia to notify DSS of significant AAT decisions and provide monthly reporting of
active matters.
DSS and Services Australia will consider the impact of the establishment of the new federal
administrative review body on its processes for identifying significant matters and will further
adjust any processes as required.
Recommendation 20.4: Publication of first instance AAT decisions
The federal administrative review body which replaces the AAT should devise a system for
publication on a readily accessible platform of first instance social security decisions which
involve significant conclusions of law or have implications for social security policy.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
On 29 September 2023, the Government announced that by the end of the year it will
introduce legislation to abolish the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT) and replace it with a
new body, the Administrative Review Tribunal (ART).
The Government is developing legislation to repeal the Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth) and to establish the ART.
The legislation is being informed by public consultation with a wide range of stakeholders
including the Expert Advisory Group on the administrative review reforms, representatives of
the legal, disability, veterans, social security, migration and refugee sectors, and users of the
current AAT.
The Government’s proposed legislation to establish the new administrative review body will
provide for decisions of the new administrative review body to be published, and will require
the publication of decisions that involve a significant conclusion of law or have significant
implications for Commonwealth policy or administration. Decisions could also be de-identified
before being published if non-disclosure requirements and privacy considerations apply in a
particular matter.
Recommendation 20.5: Administrative Review Council
Re-instate the Administrative Review Council or a body with similar membership and similar
functions, with consideration given to a particular role in review of Commonwealth
administrative decision-making processes.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
As noted in the response to recommendation 20.4, on 29 September 2023, the Government
announced that by the end of the year it will introduce legislation to abolish the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal (AAT) and replace it with a new body, the Administrative Review Tribunal
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 32
(ART). The Government is developing legislation to repeal the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
Act 1975 (Cth) and to establish the ART.
The Administrative Review Council (ARC) will be re-established under the new legislation as an
expert body to monitor and advise on the operation and integrity of the Commonwealth
administrative review system.
The ARC will provide expertise to improve the quality of government decision-making through
the development of guidance, as well as reports to provide early identification of systemic
issues and opportunities for improvement across government.
Legislation is expected to be introduced in late-2023. The process to appoint ARC members
would commence following passage of the legislation.
Recommendation 21.1: Statutory duty to assist
A statutory duty be imposed on departmental secretaries and agency chief executive officers to
ensure that their department or agency use its best endeavours to assist the Ombudsman in
any investigation concerning it, with a corresponding statutory duty on the part of
Commonwealth public servants within a department or agency being investigated to use their
best endeavours to assist the Ombudsman in the investigation.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of ensuring agencies and departments are
accountable and act in a manner that is lawful, fair and transparent. A properly resourced,
independent, impartial and robust Ombudsman is vital to safeguarding the community in their
dealings with government agencies.
The Government agrees that a clearly stated statutory duty, imposed on departmental
secretaries and agency chief executive officers, to ensure that their department or agency use
its best endeavours to assist the Ombudsman would reinforce the responsibility on heads of
agencies to ensure their agency engages in good faith and proactively assists the
Commonwealth Ombudsman.
The Government agrees that a corresponding statutory duty on Commonwealth public servants
within a department or agency being investigated to use their best endeavours to assist the
Commonwealth Ombudsman would ensure the responsibility to assist is clearly individually
borne by each of those responsible.
The Government also recognises the importance of the Inspector-General of Taxation and
Taxation Ombudsman (IGTO) in providing assurance to the community that taxation laws are
being administered with integrity. The Government supports also introducing equivalent
statutory duties to investigations conducted by the IGTO.
The Government will progress amendments to relevant legislation to introduce these statutory
duties.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 33
Recommendation 21.2: Another power to obtain information
The Ombudsman Act be amended to confer on the Ombudsman a power in equivalent terms
to that in s 33(3) of the Auditor-General Act.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of ensuring that the Office of the Commonwealth
Ombudsman has the legislative powers to undertake full, independent and transparent
investigations. The Government also recognises that in order to provide assurance that an
Ombudsman investigation is independent, the Ombudsman needs powers to obtain full, free
and direct access to agency records as part of an investigation.
The Government will introduce legislation to establish a statutory power equivalent to that of
subsection 33(3) of the Auditor-General Act 1997 (Cth). This would ensure the Ombudsman is
not dependent upon agencies to undertake searches and provide documents and information,
and will complement the Ombudsman’s existing powers to request and compel agencies to
provide information.
The Government will also seek to introduce an equivalent power for the Inspector-General of
Taxation and Taxation Ombudsman.
Recommendation 21.3: Oversight of the legal services division
Departmental and agency responses to own motion investigations by the Ombudsman should
be overseen by the legal services division of the relevant department or agency.
The Government accepts in principle this recommendation.
The Government agrees that agency and departmental responses to Ombudsman
investigations must be accurate, complete and provided in a timely manner. This needs to be
appropriately balanced with the fact that not all departments or agencies have a legal services
division to provide oversight of responses. It would also not be appropriate for a legal division
to provide oversight of a response in circumstances where the Ombudsman is investigating
matters in which a legal area within a department or agency has been directly involved.
The Government has accepted recommendation 21.1, and will progress legislative amendments
to require that departmental secretaries and agency chief executive officers ensure that their
department or agency use its best endeavours to assist the Ombudsman. Consistent with this
obligation, departmental secretaries and chief executive officers will ensure responses to
Ombudsman investigations are not led or overseen by individuals or divisions directly involved
in matters under investigation.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 34
Recommendation 21.4: Log of communications
The Ombudsman maintain a log, recording communications with a department or agency for
the purposes of an own motion investigation.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Commonwealth Ombudsman is committed to effective information and records
management systems that meet business needs, accountability requirements and stakeholder
expectations. As a public administration oversight and educative body, the Commonwealth
Ombudsman should maintain excellent records and demonstrate a high standard of
information management.
The Commonwealth Ombudsman requires investigators to maintain a log of communications
with agencies under investigation when conducting own motion investigations.
Recommendation 21.5: Powers of referral
The AAT is soon to be replaced by a new administrative review body. S 10A and s 11 of the
Ombudsman Act should be amended so as to ensure the Ombudsman has the powers of
referral and recommendation of referral in respect of that new administrative review body.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Commonwealth Ombudsman has the power under section 10A of the Ombudsman Act
1976 (Cth) to refer questions of law arising in an investigation for the opinion of the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT). The Ombudsman also has a related power, under
section 11 of the Ombudsman Act 1976 (Cth) to recommend that the principal officer of a
department make such a referral. These powers are integral to ensuring there are not
unresolved matters of law in respect of an agency’s actions under investigation by the
Ombudsman.
The Government is developing legislation to repeal the Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act
1975 (Cth) and to establish a new administrative review body. The Government will introduce
consequential amendments to sections 10A and 11 of the Ombudsman Act 1976 (Cth) to retain
the power for the Commonwealth Ombudsman to refer or recommend referral of matters to
that new body.
These amendments will enable two important elements of the Commonwealth’s administrative
law scheme to work together to resolve issues of significance to the community.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 35
Recommendation 23.1: Structure of government departments
The Australian Government should undertake an immediate and full review to examine whether
the existing structure of the social services portfolio, and the status of Services Australia as an
entity, are optimal.
The Government accepts in principle this recommendation.
The Government agrees that portfolio structures should support the effective delivery of
government services and programs. The Government will be guided by the Royal Commission’s
findings when considering the most optimal arrangement of functions and responsibilities
between the Department of Social Services and agencies in the social services portfolio, and the
status of Services Australia.
Recommendation 23.2: Obligations of public servants
The APSC should, as recommended by the Thodey Review, deliver whole-of-service induction
on essential knowledge required for public servants.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of building the skills and knowledge which are
unique and essential to working in the APS.
The APS Academy, within the Australian Public Service Commission, is a networked hub of
learning and development; working with APS and industry partners to build the capability and
performance of the APS workforce. The APS Induction Pathway (which includes an induction
training suite and mandatory modules) provides essential information and guidance to assist
new and returning officers to work effectively in the APS.
Recommendation 23.3: Fresh focus on “customer service”
Services Australia and DSS should introduce mechanisms to ensure that all new programs and
schemes are developed with a customer centric focus, and that specific testing is done to
ensure that recipients are at the forefront of each new initiative.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of designing policies and processes of government
services that focus on the needs of the individuals engaging in those services. This includes
making services as accessible as possible through a channel that meets the needs of the
individual.
There has been a substantial change to the way Services Australia approaches service delivery.
When considering a change or improvement to delivery of a service an evidence-based
understanding of the needs of customers is formed based on their feedback, and with full
exploration of how the proposed changes may impact them, before investment or service
delivery decisions are made. Services Australia will continue to embed the customer voice in the
earliest stages of decision-making, and draw on customer feedback to improve service delivery.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 36
The Department of Social Services has also established mechanisms to consult with
representative bodies and ensure feedback from recipients is considered in the development of
new policies and programs. These mechanisms include regular engagements with the
Australian Council of Social Service (ACOSS), Economic Justice Australia (EJA) and the
Federation of Ethnic Communities' Councils of Australia (FECCA).
Recommendation 23.4: Administrative Review Council
The reinstated Administrative Review Council (or similar body) should provide training and
develop resources to inform APS members about the Commonwealth administrative law
system.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government agrees that access to training and resources on the Commonwealth
administrative law system would support proper and lawful administrative decision-making
across the public service. The Government will consider the most effective means through
which to deliver this training and guidance.
The Government is committed to restoring trust and confidence in Australia’s system of
administrative review – beginning with the establishment of a new administrative review body
that is user-focused, efficient, accessible, independent and fair. As outlined in the Government’s
response to recommendation 20.5, the Government will introduce legislation to repeal the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975 (Cth) and to establish a new administrative review
body. The Administrative Review Council (ARC) will be re-established under the new legislation.
Legislation is expected to be introduced in late-2023. The process to appoint ARC members
would commence following passage of the legislation.
Recommendation 23.5: “Knowledge College”
The Commonwealth should explore the feasibility of establishing an internal college within
Services Australia to provide training and development to staff linked to the skills and
knowledge required to undertake their duties.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government supports providing training, development and the skills that support staff to
deliver high quality services on behalf of the government.
In 2022, Services Australia formed the Services Australia Learning Academy. The Learning
Academy is a networked model of learning faculties and specialist enterprise learning teams,
working in partnership to drive connected, professional and consistent learning practice across
the agency. This represents a substantial investment in providing all staff with the support, skills
and information needed to deliver critical services to the Australian public and to respond to
emerging demands on Services Australia. The focus on building capability is reflective of the
agency’s approach to supporting staff to deliver world-class customer service, through all
methods of customer engagement. This includes providing staff access to training that
supports service delivery to customers that may be vulnerable or require additional assistance.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 37
Services Australia will continue to review and assess the need for additional or supplementary
training programs that focus on elements of service delivery, where more formal training or a
qualification may be of benefit.
Recommendation 23.6: Front-line Service
SES staff at Services Australia should spend some time in a front-line service delivery role and
with other community partnerships.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government supports Senior Executive Service officials spending time in a front-line service
delivery setting or with other community partnerships, to gain exposure and insights to the
delivery of government services.
Senior Executive Service officials within Services Australia regularly spend time in a front-line
service delivery setting, including the face-to-face and telephony environments, to gain insight
into the experiences of both customers and staff.
Services Australia is also supportive of providing experience of front-line service delivery more
broadly to Australian Public Service and Senior Executive Service officials responsible for policy
development to assist when formulating policy/legislative changes and program delivery.
Recommendation 23.7: Agency heads being held to account
The Public Service Act should be amended to make it clear that the Australian Public Service
Commissioner can inquire into the conduct of former Agency Heads. Also, the Public Service
Act should be amended to allow for a disciplinary declaration to be made against former APS
employees and former Agency Heads.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
Secretaries and agency heads must be accountable for their actions.
The Government will require the performance process and framework for secretaries and
agency heads to be published.
The Government will introduce legislative amendments to the Public Service Act 1999 (Cth) to
provide the Australian Public Service (APS) Commissioner with a new power to commence own
motion reviews and investigations into Code of Conduct matters. The APS Commissioner will
no longer have to wait for a referral before commencing an inquiry.
The Government will also progress amendments to extend the APS Commissioner’s powers to
former secretaries, agency heads and APS employees. These amendments will also provide for
disciplinary declarations to be made against past secretaries, agency heads and APS
employees. This will ensure that inquiries into the conduct of former public servants can be
commenced and undertaken, and sanctions applied, following the end of their tenure.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 38
The Government is committed to robust and transparent arrangements for the employment of
department secretaries and agency heads. The Government will require the APS Commissioner
and the Secretary of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet to have regard to the
outcome of a merit-based appointments process when providing a report to the Prime Minister
on a secretary appointment.
Recommendation 23.8: Documenting decisions and discussions
The Australian Public Service Commission should develop standards for documenting
important decisions and discussions, and the delivery of training on those standards.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government supports the implementation of standards for documenting important
decisions and discussions across the APS.
The Australian Public Service Commission will implement a coordinated, APS-wide
communications strategy (in consultation with the Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner and National Archives of Australia (NAA)) that highlights the connection
between integrity and recordkeeping, in line with the latest NAA guidance; articulates support
from senior leadership for best practice in recordkeeping; and promotes existing training and
resources to enhance capability and culture around recordkeeping, including for ministers’
offices.
The Australian Public Service Commission, through the APS Academy, is also developing in
partnership with the NAA an online Record Keeping Module as part of its induction program.
This will include a range of case studies and scenarios to equip public servants to understand
their obligations for documenting important decisions and discussions.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE | ROYAL COMMISSION INTO THE ROBODEBT SCHEME 39