Australian Government

Australian Government response to the
Joint Standing Committee on Treaties report 194:

Amendments 2020 - CITES
Amendments to Appendices |, Il and II] of the

Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora.

FEBRUARY 2023

Introduction

The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
(CITES) is a multilateral treaty comprising mechanisms for regulating international trade in
endangered species. Endangered species are listed in three appendices according to the
degree of risk of extinction.

Amendments to Appendices I, II and II] of CITES were adopted at the 18th Conference of
the Parties (CoP) held in Geneva, Switzerland on 28 August 2019 and tabled in the
Parliament on 30 November 2020.

Response

The government thanks the committee for its consideration of the Amendments 2020 —
CITES - Amendments to Appendices I, II and III of the Convention on International Trade in
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, which was tabled on 16 March 2021. The
government provides the following response to the committee’s recommendations on this
matter.

Recommendation 2

The Committee recommends that, as soon as practicable after the Australian
Government is informed of a proposed amendment to a species listed in the CITES
Appendices for which Australia is a range state, or in which Australia is involved in
international trade, the relevant Minister should refer, by letter, the proposed
amendment to the Committee for inquiry, citing paragraph 1(b) of the Committee’s
resolution of appointment.

Response

Agreed. The government acknowledges the committee’s concerns regarding timing of the
amendments to the appendices to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora. This government will ensure that any proposed
amendments for species for which Australia is a range state, or in which Australia is involved
in international trade are referred to the committee for inquiry as soon as practicable after it is
informed of the proposal, citing paragraph 1(b) of the committee’s resolution of appointment.

