Australian Government response to the Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Intelligence and Security report:
Review of the mandatory data retention regime
FEBRUARY 2023
1
Australian Government response to the Parliamentary Joint Committee on
Intelligence and Security report
Review of the mandatory data retention regime
Opening Comment
The Government thanks the Committee for its considered and comprehensive report on the
mandatory data retention regime. The Government is committed to ensuring transparency and
accountability of the regime and recognises the need to protect the privacy of Australians while
also supporting law enforcement and national security agencies to effectively fulfil their
important functions.
A proportionate and effective mandatory data retention regime is necessary to ensure our
electronic surveillance laws are adapted to agencies’ operational requirements, subject to
appropriate safeguards. The regime supports restricted access to electronic information by law
enforcement and national security agencies when needed to prevent, disrupt and investigate
serious crimes and threats to national security.
Implementation of a number of the Committee’s recommendations will require legislative
reform. The Government will seek to progress these legislative amendments through
appropriate legislative action.
Concurrently, the Government is developing holistic reforms to the Commonwealth electronic
surveillance legislative framework in response to recommendations of the
Comprehensive Review of the Legal Framework of the National Intelligence Community
(Comprehensive Review). This includes aligning the statutory thresholds for access to
electronic surveillance powers and ensuring appropriate privacy protections. As part of these
reforms, the Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979 (Cth) (TIA Act) would
be repealed and replaced by a single Bill that consolidates and aligns relevant provisions of the
TIA Act, the Surveillance Devices Act 2004 (Cth) and parts of the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979 (Cth).
The Government is consulting with industry and other stakeholders in designing the reforms to
ensure the proposed settings are proportionate and effective, and that the regulatory burden is
appropriate.
The Government provides the following responses to the Committee’s recommendations on
the mandatory data retention regime.
2
Recommendation One
Within 18 months from the date of the Committee’s report, the Committee recommends that
the Department of Home Affairs prepare national guidelines on the operation of the
mandatory data retention scheme by enforcement agencies. In general terms, the purpose of
the national guidelines would be to ensure greater clarity, consistency and security in respect
of requests for – and the collection and management of – telecommunications data by
enforcement agencies across Australia.
To that end, the national guidelines must be:
• consistent with the requirements of the Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) Act 1979 and other relevant Commonwealth legislation (as amended in
accordance with the other recommendations made by the Committee in this report);
and
• adopted and followed by each enforcement agency.
In developing the national guidelines, the Department of Home Affairs should meet and
consult with (at a minimum):
• the Privacy Commissioner;
• the Commonwealth Ombudsman;
• each criminal law-enforcement agency;
• industry representatives;
• the Law Council of Australia; and
• the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and
Communications.
The national guidelines should be made public (except to the extent they contain classified
information, if any).
The Government accepts this recommendation
The Government agrees the operation and understanding of the mandatory data retention
regime must be clear and consistent across telecommunications providers and agencies.
The Attorney-General’s Department will publish Guidelines to assist agencies and providers
applying the TIA Act. As well as addressing this recommendation, the Guidelines also respond
to Recommendations 2, 3, 7 and 11.
As outlined in the Committee’s report, the Guidelines reflect the necessity of protecting
individual privacy and ensuring powers are applied consistently and proportionately across
agencies, providers and oversight.
In developing the Guidelines, the Attorney-General’s Department consulted Commonwealth,
state and territory agencies and industry representatives through the Interception Consultative
Committee. The department also consulted the Department of Infrastructure, Transport,
Regional Development, Communications and the Arts; the Office of the Commonwealth
Ombudsman; the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner; and the Law Council of
Australia.
3
Through this consultative process, the Attorney-General’s Department has ensured the
Guidelines are consistent with the intent of the legislation, represent best practice (particularly
around safeguards) and are able to be adopted and followed by agencies.
Separately, ASIO complies with the Minister’s Guidelines, which provide safeguards and
accountability for ASIO’s use of the mandatory data retention regime. These Guidelines
contain principles of proportionality governing the way ASIO obtains information, including
that inquiries and investigations should be undertaken using as little intrusion into the privacy
of affected individuals as is reasonably required, and that where possible, the least intrusive
techniques for collecting information should be used before more intrusive techniques.
The Attorney-General’s Department will ensure the Guidelines remain up to date, and will
amend and release further Guidelines, in consultation with stakeholders, if additional areas
requiring guidance are identified.
Recommendation Two
The Committee recommends that the Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
1979 be amended to clearly define the term “content or substance of a communication” for
the purpose of providing greater certainty and enhancing privacy protections.
The Department of Home Affairs should, at a minimum, meet and consult with the following
in seeking to develop this definition:
• the Communications Alliance and other industry representatives;
• the Commonwealth Ombudsman;
• the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security;
• the Law Council of Australia; and
• the Privacy Commissioner.
Moreover, in defining the term “content or substance of a communication”, Home Affairs
should specifically consider whether some information that is currently treated as
telecommunications data should now be regarded as content given what that information can
reveal about an individual.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government agrees that the obligations on carriers and carriage service providers under
the mandatory data retention regime should be clear, and should not extend to the contents or
substance of a communication.
The Government also agrees that legislative amendments to provide greater clarity about what
is considered to be ‘content’ and ‘non-content’ data for the purposes of the mandatory data
retention regime would enhance privacy protections by reducing the potential for ‘content’
information to be inadvertently and unlawfully disclosed to agencies without a warrant.
The Government notes that inserting a legislative definition of ‘contents or substance of a
communication’ in the TIA Act would have broader implications beyond the scope of the
mandatory data retention regime, and affect the interpretation of provisions governing the use
of electronic surveillance powers more broadly.
4
In addition to providing clarity and ensuring due protection for privacy, and consistent also
with the recommendations of Mr Dennis Richardson AC in his Comprehensive Review1, the
statutory definition should aim to be technology neutral.
The Government will progress this recommendation through appropriate legislative action.
In the interim, prior to legislative reform, the Attorney-General’s Department will issue
additional guidance for agencies and industry on what is the ‘content or substance of a
communication’. The guidance will be developed in consultation with agencies, industry and
oversight agencies including Commonwealth, state and territory agencies and industry
representatives through the Interception Consultative Committee; the Department of
Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications and the Arts; the Office of
the Commonwealth Ombudsman; the Office of the Inspector-General of Intelligence and
Security; the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner; and the Law Council of
Australia.
Recommendation Three
The Committee recommends that the Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
1979 be amended so that, if a provider discloses any of the information referred to in section
187A(4) of the Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979 to ASIO or a
criminal law-enforcement agency, ASIO or the enforcement agency (as applicable) must:
• not use the information;
• immediately quarantine the information;
• notify the Commonwealth Ombudsman or the IGIS (as applicable) of the disclosure;
and
• following consultation with the Ombudsman or the IGIS (as applicable), destroy the
information.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government agrees that agencies that receive information that should not have been
disclosed to them should not be able to use that information. In particular, quarantine and
notification obligations should apply if agencies unintentionally receive the contents or
substance of a communication.
The Government will progress this recommendation through appropriate legislative action.
Agencies in practice already quarantine and delete the contents or substance of a
communication and web-browsing history if the agency identifies this information as having
been supplied by a service provider in error. The Government will introduce legislative
amendments to impose these practices as statutory obligations on agencies.
In the interim, prior to legislative reform, the Attorney-General’s Department will also issue
additional guidance for agencies on how content information should be quarantined and
destroyed if it is received in error.
1 https://www.ag.gov.au/national-security/consultations/comprehensive-review-legal-framework-governing-
national-intelligence-community
5
The Government notes that agencies may have practical difficulties in determining whether
information they receive falls within subsection 187A(4) of the TIA Act. The Guidelines and
updated legislation will take this into account.
Recommendation Four
The Committee recommends that the data retention period be kept at two years.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
Recommendation Five
The Committee recommends that section 187A of the Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) Act 1979 be amended to clarify that service providers are not required to store
information generated by Internet of Things devices.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government is committed to protecting the privacy of Australians while ensuring agencies
can access the information they need to protect community safety. The Government agrees that
a general requirement for service providers to retain data generated by all Internet of Things
devices would not be appropriate given the wide range of devices and the potentially significant
compliance costs for service providers.
Defining Internet of Things devices and communications and delineating them from more
traditional devices is a complex task. Devices such as internet-connected vehicles and
smart-watches could be considered Internet of Things devices, and the data they generate is
analogous in some respects to data generated by mobile phones (for example, location data).
This data can be crucial for agencies tasked with preventing, deterring and combatting serious
crime and threats to national security.
Recognising this, the Committee’s view was that if the Government considers there are clear
benefits in requiring service providers to keep information for particular Internet of Things
devices, and that those benefits outweigh the costs, the TIA Act could be further amended to
impose clear and specific requirements on providers to retain information.
Defining Internet of Things devices would also require consideration of other key definitions
and concepts underpinning the TIA Act, such as the definition of communication.
The Government will consider in detail the treatment of Internet of Things devices when
designing its holistic reforms of the electronic surveillance legislative framework.
Recommendation Six
The Committee recommends that the Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
1979 be amended to include the following additional reporting requirements:
• the number of authorised officers in each enforcement agency and ASIO;
• the number of authorisations made by each authorised officer;
• the number of individuals that the authorisations by each enforcement agency and
ASIO related to; and
6
• in respect of authorisations in relation to criminal investigations, the specific
offence – or offences – that the authorisations related to.
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
The Government considers that agency reporting is fundamental to the transparency and
accountability of the use of powers under the Telecommunications (Interception and Access)
Act 1979.
The Government agrees with the Committee that increased agency reporting on the operation
of the mandatory data retention framework could assist oversight and review bodies in
undertaking their work, provide a higher degree of transparency and give the Parliament and
the Australian community greater trust in the use of these powers. The Government will
progress practicable and meaningful reforms to the reporting framework to better enable
oversight.
The Government will develop enhanced reporting requirements through appropriate legislative
action. In the interim, prior to legislative reform, the Attorney-General’s Department will seek
additional information from enforcement agencies for inclusion in the 2022-23
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979 Annual Report.
To achieve the intent of this recommendation, it may be necessary for agencies to update
information systems to capture the required information and generate reporting and to update
training for authorised officers. Given that enforcement agencies and ASIO have different
operating models and oversight arrangements, different approaches may be required to meet
the intent of the recommendation.
Consistent with agencies’ current practices for reporting, careful consideration will be required
to ensure sensitive law enforcement or security investigations and capabilities are not
compromised or revealed.
The current distinction between reporting for law enforcement agencies and reporting for
ASIO will be maintained. The Government notes that ASIO is also subject to additional
oversight and reporting requirements.
Recommendation Seven
The Committee recommends that, in consultation with other stakeholders (agencies with
access to the Mandatory Data Retention Regime, the Inspector General of Intelligence and
Security, the Commonwealth Ombudsman and the Commonwealth Privacy
Commissioner), the Department of Home Affairs should within 18 months of this report
develop guidelines for data collection to be applied across the Mandatory Data Retention
Regime and the most cost effective way to achieve the intended outcome of facilitating
better oversight, including an ability for enforcement agencies and Home Affairs to
produce reports to oversight agencies or Parliament when requested.
As a minimum, any such report should include the following information (in respect of
each occasion on which the powers in Chapter 4 of the Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Act 1979 were used):
7
• the section of the Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979 used to
access the data;
• the case number associated with the authorisation;
• the specific offence – or offences – that the investigation related to;
• if the authorisation related to a missing person case, the name of the missing person
• brief reasons why the authorised officer was satisfied that the disclosure was
reasonably necessary;
• where the data related to a person who did not have an obvious relationship to a
suspect in an investigation, brief reasons why the authorised officer was satisfied
that any interference with the privacy of the person that may have resulted from the
disclosure or use of the telecommunications data was justifiable and proportionate;
• the name(s) of the officers involved in the case;
• the name and appointment of the authorising officer;
• if the agency became aware that the carrier disclosed any of the information
referred to in section 187A(4) and action taken.
Where practicable, the report should also include:
• whether or not the data was used to rule someone out from an investigation;
• whether or not the person whose data was accessed was eventually charged,
prosecuted and/or convicted of a crime;
• whether or not the data accessed eventually led to the charge, prosecution and/or
conviction of another person for a crime; and
• the cost of the disclosure.
For the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, the additional record-keeping
requirements should include:
• the nature of the national security risk that led to the authorisation being given; and
• brief reasons why the authorised officer is satisfied that any interference with the
privacy of the person that may result from the disclosure or use of the
telecommunications data is justifiable and proportionate.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government shares the Committee’s concerns about the absence of consolidated data on
the operation of the mandatory data retention regime.
The Government agrees with the Committee that collecting more information about the current
functioning of the data retention regime will assist oversight and review bodies in undertaking
their work, provide a higher degree of transparency and give the Parliament and the Australian
community greater assurance about the use of these powers.
The Government agrees to providing greater guidance to ensure agencies keep sufficient and
consistent information to be able to assure Parliament and oversight agencies that access and
use of telecommunications data is lawful and appropriate. The Attorney-General’s Department
will develop guidance, in consultation with agencies, industry and oversight agencies, in line
with the response to recommendation 1.
8
Consistent with agencies’ current practices for reporting, careful consideration will be required
to ensure sensitive law enforcement or security investigations and capabilities are not
compromised or revealed. The current distinction between reporting for law enforcement
agencies and reporting for ASIO will also need to be maintained.
In addition, the Government will further consider reporting requirements as part of holistic
reforms to electronic surveillance legislation. This will ensure that reporting and oversight
across the entirety of the electronic surveillance framework is considered and the totality of
information captured by agencies against each warrant or authorisation allows for effective and
efficient oversight, while not placing an undue burden on agencies.
Recommendation Eight
The Committee recommends that section 306(5) of the Telecommunications Act 1997 be
amended to require telecommunications service providers to keep detailed records of the
kinds of information included in each disclosure of telecommunications data, including the
types of telecommunications data that were disclosed.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government supports changing the record-keeping requirements in subsection 306(5) of
the Telecommunications Act 1997 and has introduced legislative amendments to this effect in
the Telecommunications Legislation Amendment (Information Disclosure, National Interest
and Other Measures) Bill 2022.
The Government also introduced amendments to existing record-keeping obligations to
provide more clarity and transparency on the underlying legislative provisions that authorise a
disclosure of information through section 280 of the Telecommunications Act 1997. These
amendments will assist the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner in its
compliance monitoring of such records as set out in section 309 of the Telecommunications Act
1997.
The Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Communications
and the Arts will lead implementation of this recommendation.
Recommendation Nine
The Committee recommends that the Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
1979 be amended so that:
• ASIO and enforcement agencies are required to retain telecommunications data for
a prescribed minimum period to ensure that the Inspector-General of Intelligence
and Security and the Commonwealth Ombudsman (as applicable) are able to
perform their oversight functions; and
• Having satisfied the requirements of the Inspector-General of Intelligence and
Security or the Commonwealth Ombudsman (as applicable) ASIO and enforcement
agencies are required to delete telecommunications data as soon as practicable after
the telecommunications data is no longer needed (e.g. in the case of an enforcement
agency, after an investigation has concluded).
The Government accepts this recommendation
9
Independent oversight by the IGIS and the Commonwealth Ombudsman is fundamental to
ensuring accountability in the operation of the mandatory data retention regime. The
Government agrees that this oversight role must be adequately supported and facilitated by
agencies’ record keeping practices.
The Government will progress this recommendation through appropriate legislative action. In
designing these reforms, the Government will work with oversight agencies to ensure record
keeping and destruction requirements appropriately address privacy considerations, effective
oversight and operational requirements.
The Government notes the Minister’s Guidelines to ASIO require the Organisation to take
reasonable steps to destroy or otherwise dispose of personal information, where that
information is no longer required for the performance of the Organisation’s functions, or to
demonstrate compliance with the laws of the Commonwealth and of the States and Territories.
The Government also notes particular work will be required to determine the circumstances in
which data is no longer required by enforcement agencies. Implementation of this
recommendation may also require significant change in systems and practice by agencies.
The Attorney-General’s Department, in consultation with the Department of Home Affairs,
will progress action on this recommendation.
Recommendation Ten
The Committee recommends that the Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
1979 be amended so that:
• authorised officers may only make verbal authorisations for the disclosure of
telecommunications data in emergency situations; and
• the record-keeping obligations that apply to written authorisations also apply to
verbal authorisations except that:
the written record must be made as soon as practicable after the making of
o
the verbal authorisation; and
for each verbal authorisation, the authorised officer must make a record of
o
the reasons why the authorisation had to be made verbally.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government will progress this recommendation through appropriate legislative action.
The Attorney-General’s Department will lead the implementation of this recommendation, in
consultation with oversight agencies.
Recommendation Eleven
The Committee recommends that section 5AB of the Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Act 1979 be amended with a view to reducing the number of officers and
officials of criminal law-enforcement agencies who may be designated as “authorised
officers” and the circumstances in which those designations may be made. At a minimum:
10
• only officers or officials who hold a supervisory role in the functional command
chain should normally be capable of being designated as ‘authorised officers’;
although
• other individuals who hold specific appointments – rather than entire classes of
officers or officials – may be capable of being designated as ‘authorised officers’;
• in order to authorise an individual to be an authorised officer, the head of an
enforcement agency must be satisfied that it is necessary for the individual to be an
‘authorised officer’ in order for the individual to carry out his or her normal duties;
and
• prior to the head of an enforcement agency authorising an individual to be an
‘authorised officer’:
the relevant senior officer or official must complete a compulsory training
o
program in relation to Chapter 4 of the Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Act 1979; and
the head of the enforcement agency must be satisfied that the senior or
o
official has the requisite experience, knowledge and skills to exercise the
powers under Chapter 4 of the Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) Act 1979.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
Authorised officers play a critical role in the operation of the electronic surveillance
framework. The Government shares the Committee’s concerns about ensuring authorised
officers are appropriately trained and agrees that there are potential benefits in ensuring a more
consistent national approach to the training, qualifications and experience of officers
designated as “authorised officers” for the purposes of the TIA Act.
Through the development of the holistic electronic surveillance reforms, the Government will
carefully consider an appropriate threshold that the chief officer of each agency must be
satisfied of in order to designate particular officers, or individuals occupying specified
positions, as authorised officers. This threshold will be prescribed in legislation.
In designing this threshold, the Government will enable agencies to maintain a sufficient
number of authorised officers who are appropriately trained and experienced to ensure both
operational effectiveness and due consideration of each authorisation decision.
In the interim, the Attorney-General’s Department has developed Guidelines for use by
agencies when considering the designation of authorised officers under the TIA Act. The
Guidelines provide agencies with assistance in ensuring a sufficient number of authorised
officers are available with the appropriate seniority, training and expertise.
Recommendation Twelve
The Committee recommends that section 180 of the Telecommunications (Interception and
Access) Act 1979 be amended to specify when a revocation of an authorisation takes effect.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government will progress this recommendation through appropriate legislative action.
The Attorney-General’s Department will lead the implementation of this recommendation.
11
Recommendation Thirteen
The Committee recommends that section 178 be amended and section 179 be repealed so
that an authorised officer cannot make an authorisation for access to existing information
or documents unless he or she is satisfied that the disclosure is reasonably necessary for:
• the investigation of:
a serious offence; or
o
an offence against a law of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory that is
o
punishable by imprisonment for at least 3 years.
For the avoidance of doubt ‘serious offence’ is as defined in section 5D of the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979.
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
The Government is committed to ensuring access to telecommunications data is necessary and
proportionate, and recognises the Committee’s concerns about the scope of agencies’ ability to
access telecommunications data.
The Government, through its work on the holistic electronic surveillance reforms, is
considering the thresholds that should be met by law enforcement agencies seeking to conduct
activities in order to access telecommunications information. The Government will propose
legislative reforms that ensure thresholds are appropriate across the range of activities agencies
are able to undertake to access this information.
Recommendation Fourteen
The Committee recommends that Division 3 of Part 4–1 of the Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979 be amended to:
• increase the threshold for ASIO to authorise the disclosure of telecommunications
data so that it is consistent with the threshold for ASIO to intercept
telecommunications or access stored communications under a telecommunications
service warrant issued under Part 2–2 of the Act; and
• introduce a new provision, modelled on section 180F of the Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979, requiring ASIO to consider privacy before
making an authorisation.
The Government accepts this recommendation in part.
The Government appreciates the Committee’s concerns about the privacy impacts of access to
telecommunications data and notes the IGIS’s observations about the current threshold. The
Government agrees that agencies’ powers should go no further than necessary to carry out their
functions, and access to telecommunications data should be limited to that which is necessary
and proportionate.
Restricted access to telecommunications data as recommended by the Committee would be a
fundamental change to ASIO’s operations and would significantly constrain ASIO’s capability
to protect Australia and Australians from threats to their security.
12
Recommendation Fifteen
The Committee recommends that section 280(1)(b) of the Telecommunications Act 1997 be
repealed.
Moreover, the Committee recommends that the Government introduce any additional
amendments to Commonwealth legislation that are necessary to ensure that:
• only ASIO and the agencies listed in section 110A of the Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979 be permitted to authorise the disclosure of
telecommunications data; and
• those agencies can only access telecommunications data through Part 4–1 of the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979 and through no other legal
mechanism.
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
The Government shares the Committee’s concerns that paragraph 280(1)(b) of the
Telecommunications Act 1997 can operate as an inappropriate means to access
telecommunications data without appropriate oversight and safeguards.
The Government will introduce legislation to repeal this provision and replace it with one that
limits access to data (including personal information of subscribers) to specified entities in
situations where that access is necessary and proportionate to achieving an allowable
purpose. This will include consideration of reforms to other relevant provisions of the
Telecommunications Act 1997 as required. These reforms will address the need to protect the
personal information of subscribers and manage regulatory costs to industry.
The Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications and the
Arts will progress action on this recommendation.
Recommendation Sixteen
The Committee recommends that sections 186 and 187P of the Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979 be amended so that:
• the Minister must complete the report(s) referred to in section 186(2) and 187P as
soon as practicable and, in any event, within 3 months after each 30 June; and
• the Minister must cause a copy of the report(s) to be tabled in each House of the
Parliament as soon as practicable and, in any event, within 15 sitting days after the
date on which the report is completed.
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
As noted in relation to recommendation 6, the Government views reporting as a fundamental
aspect of the mandatory data retention regime, guaranteeing transparency and accountability
over how agencies use their intrusive powers. Reports that are not provided to the Parliament
and made public in a timely manner do not provide that transparency and accountability.
Reporting arrangements require the consolidation of data from law enforcement agencies in
every jurisdiction in Australia. Agencies need a reasonable amount of time to prepare and check
13
data before providing it to the Attorney-General for consolidation. The
Attorney-General’s Department also undertakes a quality assurance process with each agency
to ensure data is accurate and consistent across all agencies.
Further, the Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA) has the ability to
compel information on compliance costs from service providers under the
Telecommunications Act 1997, and then provides this to the Attorney-General’s Department
for inclusion in the TIA Act Annual Report, ordinarily 4-5 months after the end of each
financial year. The Government will consider, through the holistic electronic surveillance
reforms, providing another avenue for ACMA to report on this information, and if so, will
repeal the requirement for this information to be included in the TIA Act Annual Report to
allow for a faster tabling timeframe.
The Attorney-General’s Department will work closely with agencies and ACMA to prepare
TIA Act annual reports as quickly as possible.
The Attorney-General’s Department will progress action on this recommendation.
Recommendation Seventeen
The Committee recommends that state and territory criminal law-enforcement agencies
under section 110A be prescribed as ‘organisations’ under section 6F of the Privacy Act
1988 in relation to their collection and use of telecommunications data for the purposes of
the Notifiable Data Breach regime.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government supports the intent of the recommendation.
The Government believes that agencies that access telecommunications data under the
mandatory data retention regime should be required to report when personal information is
accessed or disclosed without authorisation, or is lost. This is an important safeguard that will
build public confidence in the mandatory data retention regime and agencies’ handling and use
of personal information.
The ability to prescribe a state or territory law enforcement agency under the Privacy Act 1988
requires the Commonwealth Attorney-General to be satisfied that the relevant state or territory
has requested the prescription of that agency.
State and territory enforcement agencies are currently subject to oversight by state and territory
oversight and privacy regulators. Any extension of the jurisdiction of the
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC) to state and territory agencies
would require close consultation with the states and territories, and careful consideration of the
interaction between the roles and responsibilities of the OAIC and state and territory oversight
and privacy regulators to avoid duplication.
The Attorney-General’s Department is leading a review of the Privacy Act 1988, which is
expected to be completed by the end of 2022. The report will be released publicly following
consideration by the Government.
14
The Attorney-General’s Department will progress action on this recommendation in
consultation with the OAIC, state and territory governments, criminal law-enforcement
agencies and oversight and privacy regulators.
Recommendation Eighteen
The Committee recommends that section 182(2) of the Telecommunications (Interception
and Access) Act 1979 be amended in line with section 68(d) for the consideration of the
communication of telecommunications data for disciplinary action and termination of
employment.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government will progress this recommendation through appropriate legislative action.
The Attorney-General’s Department will lead the implementation of this recommendation.
Recommendation Nineteen
The Committee recommends that section 29 of the Australian Information Commissioner
Act 2010, and any other statutes that apply similar constraints on information sharing by
relevant oversight agencies, be amended so that agencies that have an oversight function in
respect of the mandatory data retention regime are able to share intelligence on matters of
regulatory concern where there is a public interest in doing so.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government will progress this recommendation through appropriate legislative action.
The Government notes the Privacy (Enforcement and Other Measures) Bill 2022 introduced
in October 2022 enhances the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner’s ability to
share information with other regulators.
The Attorney-General’s Department will lead the implementation of this recommendation.
Recommendation Twenty
The Committee recommends that the Intelligence Services Act 2001 and the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979 be amended so that the
Committee may commence a review of the mandatory data retention scheme by June 2025.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government will implement this recommendation through appropriate legislative action.
The Attorney-General’s Department will lead the implementation, in consultation with the
Department of Home Affairs and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
Recommendation Twenty One
The Committee recommends that Division 1 of Part 5-1A of the Telecommunications
(Interception and Access) Act 1979 be amended to require service providers to store
15
information of the kind specified in or under section 187AA, or documents containing
information of that kind, on servers located in Australia unless specifically exempted.
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
The Government will implement this recommendation through appropriate legislative action.
The design of these reforms will require further consultation to fully determine the potential
burden on industry; and with relevant agencies to ensure the Committee’s intent of keeping
data secure is met in the most appropriate manner.
The Attorney-General’s Department will lead the implementation of this recommendation.
Recommendation Twenty Two
The Committee recommends that:
• agencies that have access to telecommunications data should develop minimum
standards for the security of telecommunications data held within their control or
premises; and,
• entities subject to telecommunications data retention requirements under the
Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979 should be required to
demonstrate to the Australian Communications and Media Authority that they have
met minimum standards for ensuring the security of retained data:
these minimum standards, applying to entities subject to
o
telecommunications data retention requirements should be developed by the
Australian Communications and Media Authority.
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
The Government agrees with the Committee that data retained by agencies and
telecommunications providers should be subject to minimum security standards.
The Government notes the range of protections that already apply to data, including through
the Privacy Act 1988, the TIA Act and the security obligations in the
Telecommunications Sector Security Reforms.
In addition to the Attorney-General’s Department’s review of the Privacy Act 1988, the
Department of Home Affairs is developing a national data security action plan as part of the
new cyber security strategy, to deliver whole-of-economy expectations and requirements for
data security.
The Attorney-General’s Department will work with ACMA, the Department of Home Affairs,
security and law enforcement agencies and oversight agencies to determine how minimum
standards should be set in light of existing protections and planned reforms. The
Attorney-General’s Department will also consult with providers to ensure full consideration is
given to the potential burden on industry.
16
