Australian Government response to the
Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Defence and Trade report:
Inquiry into the human rights of women and girls
in the Pacific
[February 2023]
Introduction
The Australian Government thanks the Parliamentary Joint Standing Committee on Foreign
Affairs, Defence and Trade (the Committee) for its inquiry into the human rights of women
and girls in the Pacific and its final report, tabled on 29 November 2021. The Government
welcomes the report and thanks those who participated in the public hearing on 18 June 2021
and contributed through written submissions.
The whole-of-government response to the Committee’s recommendations has been
coordinated by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT), in consultation with
the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet (PMC), Attorney General’s Department
(AGD), Australian Federal Police (AFP), Australian Centre for International Agricultural
Research (ACIAR), Department of Health (DoH), Department of Education (DoE),
Department of Home Affairs (Home Affairs), National Emergency Management Agency
(NEMA), Australian Border Force (ABF) and Department of Defence (DoD). The
Committee’s recommendations on disaster risk reduction, education, gender equality treaties
and legislation, transparency of results and financing, public sector and local organisation
capacity building are welcomed, and will help strengthen our work in the region.
The departments referred to above will all have a role in taking forward the
recommendations, and the key vehicle for targeted support to gender equality in the region
will be the Pacific Women Lead (PWL) program funded under Australia’s official
development assistance program and administered by DFAT. PWL ($170 million, 2021-26)
is being delivered through a hybrid model that includes partnerships with the Pacific
Community (SPC) and women’s civil society organisations. SPC, as the principal scientific
and technical regional development organisation owned by Pacific members, is being
supported to deliver against regional gender equality frameworks and commitments. SPC is
strengthening efforts to embed gender approaches across its operations. The Government is
committed to a twin-track approach, combining specific gender equality investments with
broader efforts to integrate (or ‘mainstream’) gender equality throughout all development and
humanitarian activities, across all sectors.
The Government has announced that it will ensure at least eighty per cent of Australia’s aid
investments address gender issues and tackle violence against women, which serves as a
target for work on gender equality. The Government is committed to pursuing gender
equality outcomes in partnership with the Pacific.
Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that all support provided by the Australian Government to
any organisation or bodies undertaking disaster management planning and response
work include women representatives.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
The Australian Government responds to requests from countries in the Pacific when they
experience a disaster that stretches their own capacity to respond. The Government is
committed to recognising, respecting and strengthening leadership and decision-making by
national actors undertaking disaster management planning and response, in order to better
address the needs of affected populations. Through our actions we reinforce the fact that
affected governments in the Pacific lead the response effort. Australia’s response thus
supports the country’s own governance structure and mechanisms, including for example
national disaster management offices and ministries of health, justice, and education.
Australia recognises women's leadership is essential to achieving better outcomes for our
region and supports programs which promote gender equality in humanitarian action.
The Government’s objective is to integrate gender equality and the empowerment of
women and girls and marginalised people across its humanitarian preparedness, response
and recovery and disaster risk reduction efforts. This includes supporting local women’s
and disabled people’s organisations to support their roles as first responders.
Australia’s overseas disaster response mechanisms include DFAT’s Crisis Response Team
(CRT), Australian Medical Assistance Teams (AUSMAT), Disaster Assistance Response
Teams (DART) and power line restoration team (PowerOn). The Government’s objective
is to ensure that teams are inclusive and include women representatives.
AUSMAT has a significant number of women in leadership positions. This supports
meaningful and culturally sensitive engagement with female representatives within partner
governments’ health systems, including ministries, at both senior and junior levels.
In 2021 and 2022, there were women representatives on all AUSMAT deployments, except
two, which were single person deployments. Women members of AUSMAT comprised
approximately 43 per cent of team members deployed to Solomon Islands in January 2022,
80 per cent deployed to Kiribati in January 2022 and 40 per cent deployed to Vanuatu in
March 2022.
DART and PowerOn are continually increasing their female membership, ensuring the
engagement with women in communities is effective. This proactive approach has led to
increasing partner-to-partner ties in the Pacific and more effective response outcomes.
The Crisis Response Team (CRT) consists of DFAT personnel who are trained for rapid
deployment to support Australia’s whole-of-government response to an overseas crisis. As
at July 2022, around 44 per cent of CRT members were women. DFAT has maintained an
average 40 per cent proportion of women across all deployments in Financial Year
2021-22 and is working with DFAT’s Humanitarian Gender Advisor to ensure CRT
operations are appropriately gender sensitive.
The National Emergency Management Agency is committed to working with Government
partners to ensure women are represented in all disaster management planning and
response work undertaken by the Government.
The Department of Defence (DoD) is prioritising the United Nations Women, Peace and
Security agenda and recognises that women make an indispensable contribution to conflict
prevention, conflict resolution, peace and confidence building, and humanitarian and
disaster response. Moreover, women provide an invaluable perspective in every aspect of
the planning and conduct of military operations – across the spectrum of military activity.
The Australian Defence Force (ADF) aims to include Gender Advisors or other specialist
gender personnel (such as Gender Focal Points) in all operations, exercises and planning
activities, including humanitarian and disaster response. For example, in March 2022
Defence deployed a Gender Advisor on a Royal Australian Navy vessel as part of its
disaster response to assist the Government of Tonga following the underwater volcanic
eruption and tsunami. ADF Gender Advisors ensure that a gender perspective,
(taking into account the different effects that conflict and disaster can have on men,
women, boys and girls), is considered in all phases of military operations
Recommendation 2
To ensure that an understanding of women’s needs in local areas are taken into
account, the Committee recommends that the Australian Government works with Pacific
governments to build the capacity of local organisations in the Pacific to respond to
natural disasters and ensure Pacific women are included in the delivery and evaluations
of programs.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Australian Humanitarian Partnership (AHP) is a partnership between the Department
of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) and Australian non-government organisations
(NGOs). The AHP implements the Disaster READY Program which aims to build the
capacity of local organisations across the region to manage disasters more effectively.
Activities include supporting women’s representation on community, sub-national and
national disaster committees; revising humanitarian operating procedures to ensure they are
responsive to the needs of women; and training community members, local organisations,
and government employees to address the barriers that prevent the rights and needs of
women being met.
Building on the successes of Phase I (2017-22) DFAT will seek to further strengthen the
inclusion of women in the delivery and evaluation of the AHP’s disaster preparedness
programs. The monitoring, evaluation and learning approach in Disaster READY Phase II
(2022-27) will enable communities and affected populations, particularly women and
people with a disability, to engage in and make decisions that improve implementation
directly at the local level, and to adapt responses for continuous improvement. Additional
resources will also be provided to support the participation of women’s organisations in
Disaster READY governance bodies.
The National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA), while not the lead for offshore
capacity building, is committed to working with Government agencies to support Pacific
government and local organisations in the Pacific to respond to disasters. NEMA supports
the recommendation to ensure that women representatives have an active role in the
delivery and evaluation of such programs. Throughout 2021 and 2022, AUSMAT
deployments to the Pacific have been focused on capacity building to support our regional
partners’ response to COVID-19, including in allied health, logistics and supply chains and
advisory services to National Coordination Centres.
The Department of Defence (DoD) is working with Fiji, Papua New Guinea and Tonga as
part of the South Pacific Defence Ministers’ Meeting to develop a regional Humanitarian
Assistance and Disaster Relief (HADR) Framework that applies a gender lens. The
Regional HADR Framework will complement the work of the Pacific Islands Forum and
mainstream the Women, Peace and Security agenda.
DoD offers support to Pacific militaries to achieve the mutual goal of meaningful
participation of women and girls in conflict prevention, peace processes and humanitarian
and disaster response activities. For example, DoD offers positions on its Gender Advisor
and Gender Focal Point training courses to participants from Pacific countries. These
training courses are designed to support participants to develop the skills and the necessary
knowledge to apply a gender perspective across a range of military activities, including
humanitarian crises and disasters. Another example is the ADF’s operation to deliver
vaccines to Tonga’s outer islands in September and October 2021. This marked the first
time women served at sea in an operational deployment of the Tongan Navy. The
Blackrock Peacekeeping and Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief Camp
(Blackrock Camp) redevelopment’s Fijian and Australian project team included several
women to deliver world-class peacekeeping and operational training infrastructure.
Australia is supporting the Women’s Resilience to Disasters (WRD) Program in Fiji,
Kiribati and Vanuatu, under the Pacific Women Lead program. WRD is a $13.5 million
(2021-2026), four-year partnership with UN Women, that builds on a Solomon Islands
pilot, to empower women in Fiji, Kiribati and Vanuatu to lead Pacific solutions to disaster
prevention, preparedness and recovery. The goal is to make the lives and livelihoods of
women and girls resilient to disasters and hazards, contributing to sustainable, secure, and
thriving communities. The online WRD Knowledge Hub 1, launched in February 2022,
provides a global resource on gender-responsive disaster risk reduction.
Australia also supports the Women’s International Network on Disaster Risk Reduction
(WIN DRR), in partnership with the United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction
(UNDRR). This is a professional network to support women working in disaster risk
reduction (DRR) to enhance their role in decision making and empower them to attain
leadership. The annual WIN DRR Leadership Awards recognise women’s achievements in
1 Women’s Resilience to Disasters Knowledge Hub: https://wrd.unwomen.org/
DRR across the Asia-Pacific region. The awards presented at the Australian-hosted
Asia-Pacific Ministerial Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction (APMCDRR) in
September 2022, provide an opportunity to recognise and celebrate excellence,
encouraging best practice.
Australia has partnered with UNDRR to host the APMCDRR in September 2022. The
APMCDRR is the main regional meeting in Asia-Pacific for promoting coordination and
cooperation on Disaster Risk Reduction and the implementation of the Sendai Framework
for Disaster Risk Reduction. It brings together UN Member States, intergovernmental
organisations, international and national organisations and stakeholder groups, to
accelerate progress on disaster risk reduction.
With up to 3,000 delegates from more than 40 countries, the APMCDRR is one of the most
important gatherings in the Asia-Pacific to progress disaster risk reduction efforts. As the
first regional meeting since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the APMCDRR has
been organised under the theme: From Crisis to Resilience: Transforming the Asia-Pacific
Region’s future through disaster risk reduction.
Australia supports the Shifting the Power Coalition empowering diverse young women in
Fiji to drive change from the bottom up, building their individual and collective power to
influence policy and decision making at all levels, including on risk reduction and disaster
response. This program proactively addresses the exclusion of those living with a
disability, particularly where it intersects with other forms of discrimination based on
gender, ethnicity, age, and other status factors.
In times of crisis, people with disabilities are among the most marginalised and face
particular barriers in accessing life-saving relief and recovery support. Australia recognises
people with disabilities and their representative organisations have significant untapped
capacity and should have full and equal involvement in decision-making concerning their
lives, including in crisis preparedness and response. Australia is exploring options to
establish a regional coordination mechanism to improve support for disability inclusion in
the Pacific in development and humanitarian action.
Australia also encourages better practice and improved gender and protection outcomes
through greater participation of affected people in decision making and access to
accountability mechanisms, such as complaints mechanisms and perception surveys.
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government works with Pacific
governments to provide support for projects mapping the vulnerabilities experienced by
women and girls in the region during disasters
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation.
Socio-economic data gathered prior to a disaster underpins mapping of vulnerabilities
during and after the event. Australia has provided long-term support (since 2013) to the
Pacific Community (SPC) to assist Pacific governments to integrate gender equality and
women’s human rights into policies, legislation and programs across all sectors, and
strengthen data collection and analysis, including for development and humanitarian
action. Australia is also assisting countries in the Indo-Pacific region to produce quality
gender statistics, including through the development of a new multidimensional, gender-
sensitive poverty measurement tool, and ensuring that availability of enhanced gender
statistics leads to improved development policies and humanitarian action.
With Australian support, the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA): supports Pacific countries to ensure that sector-specific needs assessments are
inclusive and participatory; promotes coordinated approaches that integrate age, gender,
disability and vulnerability in all aspects of humanitarian responses; and works towards
placing accountability to affected populations at the centre of decision making and
humanitarian programs. Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA) activities
are also integrated into humanitarian responses, through targeted briefings and maintaining
an emergency PSEA network.
OCHA continues to maintain a regional humanitarian cluster approach to support
national-led disaster management. In the Pacific, national sector-specific clusters are
usually co-chaired by a government ministry and a United Nations or civil society member.
The Gender and Protection Cluster assists Pacific Island countries in gender and
protection-sensitive disaster preparedness, response, and recovery. A key activity of the
Protection Clusters in each country is to support Rapid Protection Assessments and Rapid
Gender and Protection Analysis (vulnerability mapping) to inform government planning
and humanitarian response.
Australian Humanitarian Partnership (AHP) partners are active members in regional and
country-based Gender and Protection Clusters. In Vanuatu, CARE and Save the Children
co-lead, with the Department of Women’s Affairs, the Gender and Protection Cluster. In
Fiji, Live and Learn and CARE are part of the Regional and Fijian Protection Cluster,
actively engaging and feeding in data through to the cluster after Tropical Cyclone Harold
in 2020. In Tonga, Live and Learn and other AHP partners are liaising with the Safety and
Protection Cluster to ensure the needs of vulnerable groups are being met in recovery from
the Hunga Tonga – Hunga Ha’apai disaster.
Disaster READY has also provided training for Protection Cluster members. For example,
in 2021 in the Solomon Islands, CARE and Live and Learn supported training to improve
inclusive data collection and social impact assessment which in turn is used by the
government to inform disaster response.
AHP partners are required to deliver and report on inclusive humanitarian responses that
meet the needs of everyone regardless of age, gender and/or disability. Humanitarian
responses must seek to be inclusive. AHP must also establish measures to safeguard those
vulnerable to harm, abuse or exploitation. AHP partner CARE Australia often completes
Rapid Gender Assessments to inform these responses.
Australia is a leading supporter of international efforts to provide crisis-affected
communities with lifesaving sexual and reproductive health (SRH) services and supplies to
meet the needs of women and girls in the Indo-Pacific. These health services and supplies
are often underfunded during crises, leaving women, girls, and babies vulnerable to
preventable illness and death. Australia supports the SPRINT initiative delivered by
International Planned Parenthood Federation (IPPF). Country-based member associations
collaborate closely with local governments as well as non-governmental and community
organisation partners to deliver SRH services with specific attention to gender, disability,
and inclusion of marginalised groups. In 2021 and 2022, government and non-government
stakeholders in Fiji and Vanuatu participated in a SPRINT simulation exercise for disaster
preparedness and response planning to meet the essential SRH needs of women and girls in
crisis. IPPF plans to roll out the exercise in additional Pacific countries.
Australia also partners with the UN Population Fund (UNFPA) to pre-position SRH
supplies in countries at high risk of disaster or crisis, to allow for rapid distribution in an
emergency. Where possible, SRH supplies are tailored for the local context, and adapted
for specific groups, based on the needs and feedback of affected populations. For example,
UNFPA has customised dignity kits for elderly people, the transgender community, and
people living with a disability. The SPRINT initiative has been instrumental in the
humanitarian response to COVID-19 in the Indo-Pacific, with kits that include face masks
and sanitizer, as well as public health information about COVID-19 and hygiene.
Australia’s support for social protection in the Pacific recognises the critical role of social
protection programs to support and protect women and children, the elderly, people with a
disability and the newly impoverished in times of crisis and need. Australia is working
with partner governments to build social protection systems and programs in the Pacific
that can deliver positive impacts for women and girls. When appropriately designed,
payments can provide women with more decision-making power over household budgets,
improve access to health services for women and children, and support and enable
investment in education, including for girls.
Australia has supported numerous social protection responses to disaster events (in Fiji,
Vanuatu and Tonga), directed through Pacific Island country social protection systems and
programs.
Australia has funded the World Bank to implement the Pacific Data Observatory, which is
using high frequency telephone surveys to monitor household wellbeing across the region,
including when disasters and shocks hit. Australia also funds the World Bank Rapid Social
Response fund, including grant projects in Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Kiribati, Tonga and
Samoa ($1.8 million since January 2021) to provide technical advice to governments on
adaptive and gender-sensitive social protection.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with the tertiary
education sector to maintain networks with alumni from Pacific island countries who
have studied in Australia, including women and girls.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation.
DFAT supports and funds in-country Australia Awards alumni associations to engage with
professional networks in Australia and facilitate skills and knowledge development to
apply in their home country context. The associations network alumni from specialised
programs, including the Australian Awards Scholarships (AAS), Australia Awards Pacific
Scholarships (AAPS), Australia Awards Papua New Guinea (AAPNG) and the John
Allwright Fellowship from the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research
(ACIAR). They also support targeted enrichment programs for active scholars such as the
Australia Awards Women Leading and Influencing (WLI) program to develop skills and
build regional networks through interaction with alumni as mentors and sponsors. Alumni
are regularly engaged through high-level bilateral, regional and sector-specific events and
Government-led engagements that aim to provide equitable gender representation for
participants. These activities strengthen networks, institutional and people-to-people
linkages between Australia and the Pacific.
The Australian Institute of Police Management (AIPM) Pacific Faculty of Policing (PFP)
maintains an alumni of all participants who are regularly called upon for inclusion in future
programs as mentors, program sponsors, and visiting fellows. PFP also works in
partnership with the Pacific Security College to access their alumni of men and women
participants and has close working relationships with tertiary providers across the Pacific,
including the University of the South Pacific.
The Pacific Police Development Program-Regional (PPDP-R) encourages the inclusion of
women in all its capability development activities and maintains a sex-disaggregated
database of Pacific police members who have participated in program activities.
As part of its capability assessment process, the Pacific Community for Law Enforcement
Cooperation (PCLEC) works closely with other Government funded Pacific education
initiatives (including the Australia Pacific Security College and the Australian Awards
program) to identify Pacific police members among their alumni. This arrangement will
continue, offering award recipients a workplace attachment to strengthen relationships and
networks across police personnel in the Pacific.
The Department of Defence (DoD) is establishing a Pacific Security Network alumni
consisting of police, civilian and military leaders from across the South West Pacific. The
network will reinforce existing people-to-people connections; promote skill development;
invest in the growth of regional leaders and enhance cooperation and collaboration. The
network will empower women to reach their potential through enhanced access to
opportunities (including learning and development, attendance at events focused on
relationship building, sharing of insights and experiences) and the support of regional
networks.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government continue to focus
diplomatic efforts on the implementation of treaties and other legislation aimed at
improving the quality of life for women and girls, including political representation and
involvement in decision-making.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation.
Australia supports a range of initiatives to strengthen legislation to improve outcomes for
women and girls, including to enhance women’s voices and roles in decision-making,
leadership and peacebuilding, promote women’s economic empowerment and to end all
forms of violence against women and girls.
Under the Pacific Women Lead program, Australia is working with a range of Pacific
partners, including the Pacific Islands Forum and the Pacific Community (SPC), to adopt
policies and legislation to improve the lives of women and girls in the Pacific. Australian
support to SPC will help enable the organisation to continue its work as Secretariat to the
Regional Working Group on Implementation of Domestic Violence Legislation, and
through its network of country focal officers focused on human rights.
Australia supports UN Women to provide technical knowledge and capacity building
support to Member States to develop, adopt and implement gender-responsive laws and
policies, including on women’s political participation.
The Government is strongly committed to defending and promoting international norms
and standards on gender equality through our engagement with international forums such
as the Commission on the Status of Women, the UN Security Council and General
Assembly, and the Human Rights Council. As part of implementing in full the Australian
Human Rights Commission Report Respect@Work, the Government has announced it will
ratify the International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention Concerning the elimination
of violence and harassment in the world of work (ILO 190).
Australia consistently works to promote and protect gender equality in Human Rights
Council Universal Periodic Reviews (UPRs) [a peer-review process, in which the human
rights record of each UN Member State is considered every five years], including to
encourage Member States to implement and strengthen action to improve the quality of life
for women and girls. In 2021, Australia delivered statements at six Pacific country UPRs
(Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Palau, Federated States of Micronesia and
Nauru) all of which commented on gender, with five including recommendations to
strengthen gender equality outcomes.
Australia’s second National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security (2021-2031)
builds on existing efforts to promote gender equality and increase the full and meaningful
participation and leadership of women in peace and security processes. The National
Action Plan covers the four pillars of the Women, Peace and Security Agenda –
participation, protection, prevention, and relief and recovery.
The human rights of women and girls are also protected by the seven core
international human rights treaties to which Australia is a party. These are the:
• International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
• International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights;
• Convention on the Rights of the Child;
• Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment;
• Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination;
• Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; and
• Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government continue to work with
Pacific governments on public sector capacity-building work.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government is committed to supporting a wide range of public sector capacity
building activities, including to promote gender equality and women’s human rights.
Australia provides support to sectors that are critical to upholding women’s rights,
including health and education, economic governance, and law and justice.
Australia has provided long-term support (since 2013) to the Pacific Community (SPC) to
assist Pacific governments to integrate gender equality and women’s human rights into
policies, legislation and programs across all sectors, and strengthen data collection and
analysis. This support is continuing under Pacific Women Lead as a critical step in
ensuring Pacific governments build capacity to integrate gender equality considerations
into their operations.
At the country level, Australia funds in-line and advisory public sector positions in Nauru,
Kiribati and Tuvalu through the Building Pacific Capacity program (2021-2025, $8
million). These roles integrate gender equality and social inclusion outcomes to support
and enhance partners’ efforts; for example, public financial management advisers in Nauru
and Kiribati (and under recruitment in Tuvalu) promoting gender-responsive budgeting.
In Tonga, the Australian Government will fund in-line positions at the Women’s Affairs
and Gender Equality Division of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. This will help underpin
Tonga’s efforts to promote women’s rights and opportunities in all areas of government,
including service delivery, leadership, social protection and human rights, humanitarian
response, and economic empowerment and equality.
In Fiji, Australia is supporting the Government of Fiji to adopt and monitor gender-
responsive budget allocations across several ministries in 2022. This is part of a broader
effort by Fiji, to institutionalise a new gender-responsive budgeting methodology to enable
greater equitable allocation of resources and strengthen the resilience of women and
vulnerable people in Fiji.
In line with the AFP’s International Command Gender Strategy 2018-2024, AFP missions
(in Papua New Guinea, Vanuatu, Solomon Islands, Nauru, Tonga, Samoa, and Timor-
Leste) include activities to improve gender composition and capacity within partner police
and increase partner police services’ capability on gender-related law enforcement
operations. Common gender-related capacity building activities include promoting gender
mainstreaming, building capability on gender-related law enforcement, supporting
women’s advisory networks, facilitating gender training and supporting women’s
leadership.
The Attorney-General’s Department (AGD) leads Australia's support to the Pacific Islands
Law Officers’ Network (PILON), a regional network of senior Pacific law and justice
officials. Combatting Sexual and Gender Based Violence (SGBV) is one of PILON’s three
strategic priorities.
AGD also leads an annual Pacific Legal Policy Twinning Program providing a unique
opportunity for Pacific law and justice officers to improve their legal policy skills and
progress an identified policy project specific to their home agency. The focus has been on
projects that align with PILON’s priorities and most recently, combatting SGBV.
The Australian Border Force (ABF) in partnership with the Oceania Customs Organisation
(OCO) and RMIT University delivered the inaugural (virtual) Pacific Women’s
Professional Development Program (PWPDP) in March 2022. The March PWPDP event
brought together 60 participants in Customs Administrations from 17 Pacific Island
countries. The PWPD program supports women to build knowledge, skills and confidence
to realise their full potential through leadership capability development and fostering
opportunities for mentoring and professional collaboration. The program aims to enhance
prospects for future career progression within PWPDP members’ home administrations.
Further PWPD events are being considered to utilise other relevant customs training
packages.
The Department of Defence (DoD) and the ADF participate in the Pacific Defence Gender
Network meeting. The Network promotes the participation of women in Pacific defence
forces through annual seminars and increased collaboration. It works to empower women
within Pacific defence forces and promotes male champions and advocates.
In Papua New Guinea, the ADF continues to support senior members of the Papua New
Guinea Defence Force (PNGDF) to advocate for gender equality and women’s
empowerment. Through the Defence Cooperation Program in Papua New Guinea,
Australia supports, for example, gender policy awareness workshops and consultations. In
2022, Defence provided training on Women, Peace and Security to PNGDF and PNG
Department of Defence personnel.
In Tonga, through the Pacific Maritime Security Program (PMSP), female engineers for the
Guardian-class Patrol Boats have hosted outreach activities at local girl’s high schools
aimed at year 11 and 12 science, technology and maths students.
Recommendation 7
7a. The Committee recommends that the Australian Government publish an assessment
of the progress on building the capacity of local organisations in the Pacific to advance
the rights of women and girls.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
Refer also to the Government’s response to Recommendation 12(a).
The Government has a strong focus on building the capacity of local organisations in the
Pacific, delivered through multiple initiatives and a range of partners. Locally led and
owned development is central to the Pacific Women Lead program (2021-2026). Through
the program, the Government will enable local and regional organisations in the Pacific,
supporting their needs and enabling them to provide similar flow-through support to
smaller member organisations. Relevant Pacific Women Lead reviews, evaluations and
monitoring will consider the capacity of local organisations to advance the rights of women
and girls. The Government is committed to transparency and will work with partners to
publish reports.
7b. This should include data about what proportion of funding is provided to local
organisations directly, and/or through intermediaries.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
As noted in the response to 7 a), programming, funding support and program performance
will be reported regularly and assessed through independent evaluations.
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with Pacific
governments to provide support for the secondary and tertiary education sector within
Pacific island countries, including infrastructure for education institutions.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government is working with Pacific governments to strengthen education systems and
improve education and employment pathways for Pacific Islanders.
The Government recognises that education and skills development will play an important
role in the Pacific’s economic and social recovery from the impacts of COVID-19 and in
helping to address longer-term development challenges in the region.
The Government is committed to placing a high priority on education in Australia’s
development program. In 2020-21, 59 per cent ($134.1 million) of education spending in
the Pacific region was from the bilateral program budget. It is estimated that this increased
to 64 per cent in 2021-22.
In Vanuatu, Australia is the largest bilateral partner in the education and skills sector. In
conjunction with the Ministry of Education and Training (MoET), and New Zealand
Government, Australia is supporting a range of climate and disaster resilient education
infrastructure projects across Vanuatu, including building six schools on Ambae, replacing
those lost to the Ambae volcanic eruptions, and nine on Santo which will service displaced
communities from Ambae. Australia, in partnership with MoET and the New Zealand
Government, is also building a new primary school in the Beverly Hills community of
Port Vila, Efate, which is expected to be completed by end 2022.
Australia is also supporting the repairs and reconstruction of health and education facilities
in provinces affected by Tropical Cyclone Harold (Category 5, April 2020). This includes
immediate repairs to ten damaged schools on Malo, Maewo and Pentecost.
In Solomon Islands, Australia is working in partnership with Solomon Islands and
New Zealand to improve access to quality basic education for all girls and boys
(Solomon Islands Education Sector Support Program (ESSP), $41.5 million Australian
contribution 2020-23). The partnership includes a focus on girls, including provision of
girl-friendly infrastructure (including water, sanitation and hygiene facilities), especially at
junior secondary level to increase transition and retention of girls at that level.
In Fiji, the Australian Defence Force worked in partnership with Fiji, New Zealand and
France to rebuild classrooms and other education infrastructure at Lekutu Secondary
School in Bua, Vanua Levu.
Through ESSP, Australia has also supported construction of six girls’ dormitories
including ablution blocks. It is also supporting gender equality and social inclusion by
ensuring that new curriculum materials are gender inclusive in terms of roles,
responsibilities and depiction of careers; promoting teacher professional development that
uses gender inclusive strategies in the classroom; and encouraging greater parental
involvement in their children’s education and fostering attitude and behaviour change in
relation to ensuring girls’ and boys’ equal access to - and participation in - schooling
through non-government organisation led community initiatives.
The Government is investing in secondary education in a number of ways.
• The Pacific Secondary Schools Project ($16 million, 2021-2024) will undertake
research on the skills and competencies and education and training opportunities
available to young people (14-18 years old) in the Pacific region. It will lead to a
series of interventions to help improve the quality of secondary education,
including in the context of COVID-19 recovery, and is being implemented in
partnership with the World Bank and the Education and Quality Assessment
Program (EQAP).
• Through EQAP, the Government is supporting Pacific Island governments to
monitor education outcomes using data from the Pacific Islands Literacy and
Numeracy Assessment program to inform education policies.
The Government also invests in the university and vocational education and training (VET)
sectors in the Pacific including:
• A partnership with the University of the South Pacific (USP) ($84 million,
2019-2025) to deliver quality tertiary education to over 30,000 Pacific students
across the region. Since 2003, Australia has supported 1,230 (703 women) Pacific
students to complete studies at USP under the Australia Awards Pacific
Scholarships Program.
• The Australian Pacific Training Coalition (APTC) ($154 million, 2018-2022),
implemented by Queensland TAFE, delivers Australian accredited VET courses to
Pacific students across the region in areas of labour market need. Over 17,000
Pacific Islanders have graduated from APTC, including almost 7,000 women.
• The Australia Awards Pacific Scholarships program provides people from Pacific
countries with opportunities to study at selected education institutions in the Pacific
region. Scholarships for study at Pacific institutions are part of Australia’s broader
objectives of promoting education and training quality in the region, and to support
and grow the capability of Pacific tertiary institutions.
• The Australia Awards Papua New Guinea program provides PNG citizens with
scholarships for long or short-term study to achieve tertiary qualifications in
Australia or in Papua New Guinea. The program contributes to Papua New
Guinea’s economic, social and human development by building a skilled workforce
to address critical human resource gaps and to support in-country educational
institutions capability development.
The Australian Centre for Agricultural Research (ACIAR) has provided support for the
tertiary education sector in the Pacific through the Pacific Agriculture Scholarships and
Support (PASS) Program since 2008 with the requirement that half of all placements go to
women. It provides scholarships and support to postgraduate students in agriculture,
forestry and fisheries at the University of the South Pacific and Fiji National University.
ACIAR scholars and partners can access professional development opportunities after the
completion of their tertiary qualification. The Meryl Williams Fellowship for women in
research leadership offers fellows the opportunity to develop professional linkages,
enhance and build skills in leadership and management, and build the capacities of their
organisations. The Fellowship currently supports 43 women from across the Indo-Pacific.
ACIAR supports two other fellowships for further study and capacity building and strives
for a minimum 50 per cent participation of women in all capacity building programs.
The Government is exploring new avenues to deepen education links between Australia
and the Pacific, including opportunities to enhance education and employment pathways
for Pacific women. For example, the Pacific Australia Labour Mobility (PALM) scheme is
piloting a training partnership with APTC and aged care employers to increase
employment, predominantly for women. The Government is also working with partner
countries on strategies to increase women’s participation in labour mobility across sectors
traditionally dominated by men, including horticulture and agriculture.
Recommendation 9
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government extends the role of the
multi-role vessel to include working in partnership with civil society to support the
Pacific Islands.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government is delivering a dedicated Pacific Support Vessel. The vessel is available
for humanitarian assistance and disaster relief and other missions to support the Pacific
where required. The vessel sailed in September 2022 for its maiden voyage, as a Royal
Australian Navy flagged vessel, in time for the 2022-23 high-risk weather season. The
missions of the vessel will be undertaken in consultation with Pacific governments.
Recommendation 10
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider long-term funding
cycles for official development assistance to be at least five-years.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The development budget operates on an annual budget appropriations cycle in line with the
broader Federal Budget decision-making process for allocating public resources. In
accordance with Commonwealth legislation, Government delegates can enter into
multi-year commitments for official development assistance at the investment level, subject
to annual budget appropriations.
Australia’s regional gender equality investment, Pacific Women Lead, is funded for five
years (2021-2026) with an option to extend for a further three years. This recognises that
access to predictable long-term funding enhances the ability of partners to effectively and
efficiently manage resources and deliver programming.
The 2019 ‘Ending Violence Against Women and Girls (EVAWG): Evaluating a decade of
Australia’s development assistance’, found that Australia’s long-term commitment to
EVAWG has had a positive impact. The evaluation emphasised the importance of
integrating EVAWG in all Australia’s development cooperation investments. A key finding
of the evaluation was that long-term funding to women’s organisations has been effective
and catalytic. In Pacific countries, women’s organisations are now driving EVAWG. All of
the recommendations in the evaluation were accepted.
The Government is committed to increasing the focus of attention on the prevention of
violence against women and girls and supporting women’s organisations addressing and
responding to such violence.
Recommendation 11
The Committee recommends the Australian Government extend its current five-year
commitment to the Pacific Women Lead program to allow for funding cycles of this
duration to be provided and to include a target for its gender expenditure.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
Pacific Women Lead is funded for five years ($170 million, 2021-2026), with an option to
extend for a further three years. Extension of the program will depend on a range of
factors, including the program’s performance, which will be assessed through an
independent evaluation.
Australia has a history of long-term support for gender equality and women’s
empowerment in the Pacific region and the Government is committed to continuing this
work with partners in the region to advance women’s human rights.
DFAT already draws on OECD Development Assistance Committee guidance on gender
equality and development expenditure in the aid program, and reports on this publicly,
including to the OECD.
In the May 2022-23 Official Development Assistance (ODA) budget estimates, DFAT
forecast that $1.5 billion in expenditure will promote and support gender equality across
the development program, including approximately $500 million in the Pacific.
The Government has announced that it will ensure at least eighty per cent of Australia’s aid
investments address gender issues and tackle violence against women, which serves as a
target for work on gender equality.
Recommendation 12
12a. The Committee recommends that the Australian Government commit to
continuing to undertake and publish strategic, thematic evaluations focusing on
substantive human rights issues affecting women and girls.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
Evaluations are a central component of the development assistance program, providing
both learning and accountability across DFAT's activities.
Annual Development Evaluation Plans are published which outline planned evaluations for
the calendar year. Completed evaluations to be published on the DFAT website with a
management response. These evaluations contain extensive data on the performance of
Australia’s development cooperation, including in relation to gender equality and women’s
empowerment in the Pacific.
DFAT evaluations have and will continue to cover a range of strategic human rights issues
affecting women and girls across multiple country programs. This work has included the
publication of ‘Ending Violence Against Women and Girls: Evaluating a decade of
Australia’s development assistance’ in 2019. This evaluation provided a critical lens for
assessing Australia’s progress and made recommendations to guide Australia’s aid
program and policy engagement on EVAWG for the next decade. With a broad reach
across multiple (14) country contexts, the 2020 ‘Pacific Women Shaping Pacific
Development Six-Year Evaluation Report’ provided strategic recommendations for DFAT
relating to human rights issues for women and girls in the Pacific. Lessons from
evaluations such as these inform the design and delivery of development cooperation
programs delivered by DFAT, both in the Pacific and across other geographic locations.
12b. This should allow evaluations of the full range of official development assistance,
and extend evaluations beyond those focused only at the investment or program-level.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
See response above.
Recommendation 13
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government improve monitoring,
evaluation and reporting of development assistance programs to ensure transparency
and easy access to data, especially including reporting on funding for gender equality
and women’s empowerment activities in the Pacific.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
DFAT has a comprehensive approach to monitoring, evaluation and reporting of
development assistance programs.
DFAT has worked to enhance the transparency and accountability of the development
program by improving the availability and consistency of information on the DFAT
website.
DFAT provides guidance to staff on publishing information on development investments,
to ensure consistency and accessibility across country, thematic and sectoral webpages on
our website.
Information on Australia’s support to gender equality, including activities in the Pacific, is
provided on the DFAT website and guidance on sector specific programming is provided
through DFAT’s Aid Programming Guide.
We meet Australia’s international development program reporting obligations to the OECD
Development Assistance Committee and maintain our membership in the International Aid
Transparency Initiative. We publish extensive performance information; an Official
Development Assistance (ODA) Budget Summary; an ODA Statistical Summary; and the
list of development investments between $3 million and $10 million.
The Government will further consider this recommendation in the context of preparing a
new development policy and associated performance management system. The new policy
will be finalised in the first half of 2023. The Government is committed to improving
transparency in Australia’s international development program, including through the
development policy and performance system. For example, the Government recently
agreed to the publication of the OECD Development Assistance Committee’s 2021 mid-
term review of Australia’s development program. This is the first time permission has been
granted for publication since 2013.
Recommendation 14
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, on an annual basis,
publish data on the disbursements made to organisations for the purpose of gender
equality initiatives. This should list the organisations receiving disbursements.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government is committed to ensuring transparency in how it delivers Australia’s
Overseas Development Assistance (ODA) programs. DFAT’s actual ODA expenditure is
reported in the annual publication Australia's Official Development Assistance: Statistical
Summary.
DFAT will continue to report ODA expenditure at the investment level in line with OECD
Development Assistance Committee (DAC) rules and guidelines. Each year Australia
reports on calendar year funding data to the DAC’s annual development finance statistics
dataset, the Creditor Reporting System. This includes reporting on gender equality sectoral
expenditure, as well as assessing every investment for its contribution to gender equality
objectives. Names and types of organisations receiving disbursements are reported to the
DAC. Australia’s Creditor Reporting System data is publicly available on the OECD DAC
website.
AusTender provides centralised publication of Government business opportunities, annual
procurement plans, multi-use lists and contracts awarded, including those for work that
promotes gender equality.
Glossary
AAPNG Australia Awards Papua New Guinea
AAPS Australia Awards Pacific Scholarships
AAS Australia Awards Scholarships
ABF Australian Border Force
ACIAR Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research
ADF Australian Defence Force
AFP Australian Federal Police
AGD Attorney General’s Department
AHP Australian Humanitarian Partnership
AIPM Australian Institute of Police Management
APMCDRR Asia-Pacific Ministerial Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction
AUSMAT Australian Medical Assistance Teams
CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of all form of Discrimination Against
Women
CRT Crisis Response Team
DAC Development Assistance Committee
DART Disaster Assistance Response Team
DFAT Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
DoD Department of Defence
DoE Department of Education
DoH Department of Health
DRR Disaster Risk Reduction
EQAP Education and Quality Assessment Program
EVAWG Ending Violence Against Women and Girls
GEPC Gender Equality and Policy Committee
GPE Global Partnership for Education
HADR Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief
Home Affairs Department of Home Affairs
ILO International Labour Organization
IPPF International Planned Parenthood Federation
MoET Ministry of Education and Training
NEMA National Emergency Management Agency
NGO Non-government organisation
OCHA UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
OCO Oceania Customs Organisations
ODA Official Development Assistance
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development
PALM Pacific Australia Labour Mobility
PASS Pacific Agriculture Scholarships and Support
PCLEC Pacific Community for Law Enforcement Cooperation
PDGN Pacific Defence Gender Network
PFP Pacific Faculty of Policing
PILON Pacific Islands Law Officers Network
PMC Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet
PMSP Pacific Maritime Security Program
PNGDF Papua New Guinea Defence Force
PowerOn Powerline restoration team
PPDP-R Pacific Police Development Program - Regional
PSEA Prevention of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
PWL Pacific Women Lead
PWPD Pacific Women’s Professional Development Program
SGBV Sexual and Gender Based Violence
SPC Pacific Community
SRH Sexual and Reproductive Health
SRHR Sexual and Reproductive Health Rights
UNDRR United Nations Office for Disaster Risk Reduction
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund
UPR Universal Periodic Reviews
VET Vocational Education and Training
WIN DRR Women's International Network on Disaster Risk Reduction
WLI Women Leading and Influencing
WRD Women’s Resilience to Disasters
