Australian Government response to the
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee report:
Commonwealth Workplace Protection Orders Bill 2024 [Provisions]
July 2025
Australian Government response to the Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee report
Introduction
The Australian Government thanks the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation
Committee (the Committee) for its report, Commonwealth Workplace Protection Orders Bill
2024 [Provisions], tabled on 14 March 2025. The Government would like to acknowledge
the contributions that organisations made in preparing written submissions to the
Committee’s inquiry.
The Commonwealth Workplace Protection Orders Bill 2024 lapsed in the Senate on
28 March 2025.
The Bill sought to enhance protections for Commonwealth workers who face increasing acts
of aggression and violence from the public when performing their work delivering essential
Government services. The Bill would respond to Recommendation 17 of the Services
Australia Security Risk Management Review conducted by Mr Graham Ashton APM.
The Government will take into consideration the Committee’s report and contributions from
organisations in their written submissions to the Committee’s inquiry should the Bill be
re-introduced to the Parliament.
The Government is pleased to provide the following response to the Committee’s
recommendations.
Committee’s Recommendations
Recommendation 1:
The committee recommends that the Explanatory Memorandum be amended to clarify that a
person's status as a Commonwealth worker does not depend on whether that person is easily
identified as a Commonwealth worker.
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
Should the Bill be re-introduced to Parliament, the Committee’s comments in relation to the
content of the Explanatory Memorandum will be addressed.
Recommendation 2:
Subject to the preceding recommendation, the committee recommends that the Senate pass
the bill.
The Government supports this recommendation.
