OFFICIAL
Australian Government response to the
Joint Standing Committee on Treaties report:
Agreement Among the Government of Australia, the
Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, and the Government of the United
States of America for Cooperation Related to Naval
Nuclear Propulsion
February 2025
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
On 5 August 2024, AUKUS partners took another significant step forward in facilitating
Australia’s acquisition of conventionally armed, nuclear-powered submarines, with the
signing of the Agreement Among the Government of Australia, the Government of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the Government of the United States of
America for Cooperation Related to Naval Nuclear Propulsion (the ‘Agreement’).
The Agreement establishes a legally-binding framework to facilitate the transfer of nuclear
material and equipment from the United Kingdom and the United States to Australia, as well
as the communication and exchange of naval nuclear propulsion information between
Australia, the United Kingdom and the United States. The Agreement supersedes the
Agreement between the Government of the United States of America, the Government of
Australia, and the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
for the Exchange of Naval Nuclear Propulsion Information, which was due to expire on
31 December 2025, and has facilitated the exchange of naval nuclear propulsion information
to-date.
The Agreement will enable the transfer of Virginia class submarines from the United States to
Australia from the early 2030s, as well as the transfer of information and equipment from the
United Kingdom for use in Australia's SSN-AUKUS submarines. Importantly, it also reinforces
the AUKUS partners’ commitment to setting the highest non-proliferation standard, and is
consistent with Australia’s international non-proliferation obligations. The Agreement
entered into force on 17 January 2025.
The Government acknowledges the views of the Joint Standing Committee on Treaties (the
Committee) in its inquiry into the Agreement. The Committee made eight recommendations
in its report, tabled on 27 November 2024. The Government agrees to six recommendations,
agrees in-principle to one recommendation and notes one recommendation.
The Government Response is outlined below.
Recommendation One
The Committee supports the Agreement among the Government of Australia, the Government
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the Government of the
United States of America for Cooperation Related to Naval Nuclear Propulsion and
recommends that binding treaty action be taken.
Response to recommendation: Agreed
The Government welcomes the support of the Committee. The Government has taken
binding treaty action.
On 17 January 2025, the Agreement entered into force following an exchange of diplomatic
notes between Australia, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and the
United States of America notifying of the respective completion of domestic requirements (in
accordance with Article XIII.A of the Agreement).
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation Two
The Committee recommends that the Government and the Australian Submarine Agency
expand and enhance community education activities to inform the general population on how
AUKUS is in the national interest, including the distinct advantages of nuclear-powered
submarines.
Response to recommendation: Agreed
Building and maintaining an understanding of the program and how it contributes to
Australia’s national security and defence capabilities will remain an important line of effort in
the Government’s nuclear-powered submarine program. It will require ongoing
consideration and communications within the context of the biennial National Defence
Strategy.
Australian Government agencies will continue to provide public information to build the
knowledge and understanding of the program and our progress in the Australian community.
Recommendation Three
The Committee recommends appropriate parliamentary scrutiny of any supplementary or
additional instruments resulting from ratifying the AUKUS treaty.
Response to recommendation: Noted
The Government supports the intent of the recommendation.
The Government had intended the Defence portfolio to be subject to the Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Defence (PJCD). The Government considers the PJCD would have been an
important forum for ensuring appropriate parliamentary consideration of the AUKUS
partnership and Australia’s nuclear-powered submarine program. It is therefore regrettable
that, despite the bi-partisan recommendation of the Joint Standing Committee on Foreign
Affairs, Defence and Trade, Coalition Senators voted with Greens Senators against the PJCD
Bill in the Senate on 4 July 2024. The Government hopes that a future Parliament will
reconsider the establishment of the PJCD.
Any supplementary or additional instruments of treaty status will be subject to appropriate
parliamentary scrutiny in accordance with Australia’s treaty making process and existing
parliamentary oversight mechanisms.
Recommendation Four
The Committee recommends that community and worker consultation, engagement and
public transparency be prioritised in the development of the plan for the management,
transportation and storage of AUKUS-related nuclear waste.
Response to recommendation: Agreed
The Government is committed to maintaining the highest levels of nuclear safety and
stewardship, including in relation to radioactive waste. The Government notes that
community and worker engagement is critical to build transparency and understanding of
nuclear safety plans and the regulatory framework and licencing regime that will be in place
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
to protect our workers, communities, and the environment. This will also be a priority of the
new Australian Naval Nuclear Power Safety Regulator when established in 2025.
Recommendation Five
The Committee recommends that advice published by the Australian Naval Nuclear Power
Safety Regulator be made publicly available within a timely fashion to enhance transparency.
Response to recommendation: Agreed in-principle
The Government agrees in-principle to the recommendation.
The Regulator will be required to report to the Minister on a range of matters. The Regulator
will also prepare an annual report on its activities, decisions and performance, which will be
made publicly available in accordance with legislation. The Regulator will be required to
report to the Minister and Parliament in relation to certain nuclear safety incidents. The
Regulator will publish guidance material including relevant codes to inform the regulated
community, and the public, on its processes and decision-making.
The Government notes that under the Australian Naval Nuclear Power Safety Act 2024 the
appointed Director-General will have some discretion over the scope of information that is
published. There will be aspects of the Regulator’s functions and activities which cannot be
made publicly available in order to protect Australia’s and AUKUS partners’ naval nuclear-
powered submarine capability and information relating to military operations or activities.
Recommendation Six
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government launch an AUKUS career and
employment opportunities promotion campaign and further enhance existing STEM and
traditional trades engagement programs for local schools and tertiary education providers.
Response to recommendation: Agreed
The Government will continue to consider and review initiatives in line with Nuclear-
Powered Submarine (NPS) Enterprise workforce planning and related arrangements.
The NPS Technical Student Support Scholarships announced in the 2024-25 Budget will
include activities to promote STEM scholarships and career and employment opportunities
related to the NPS Enterprise.
Australian Government agencies will also continue to work closely with state and territory
governments, professional bodies, and stakeholders across the NPS Enterprise, to develop
effective programs, and to support and enhance existing trades and STEM programs across
relevant educational levels.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation Seven
The Committee recommends that the Government partner with relevant State and Local
governments to collaborate and coordinate on planning and delivery of enabling programs,
infrastructure and works to support communities involved in the implementation of AUKUS.
Response to recommendation: Agreed
The Government is committed to working closely with state and local governments,
particularly in South Australia and Western Australia, to achieve the outcomes listed in
Recommendation Seven. Efforts to coordinate are multifaceted, with the primary forum of
coordination occurring in formal steering groups and working groups created in both states
across the three levels of government. The Government has entered into Cooperation
Agreements with the governments of South Australia and Western Australia respectively to
outline scope, intentions, rules and responsibilities for taking forward cooperation and
implementation of the nuclear-powered submarine program under AUKUS.
Recommendation Eight
The Committee recommends that the Australian Submarine Agency enhance engagement and
consultation with the local Traditional Owner group and First Nations peoples; and with local
environmental groups.
Response to recommendation: Agreed
The Australian Submarine Agency is committed to ongoing engagement and consultation
with local Traditional Owner groups and First Nations peoples. These engagements will
continue and increase, ensuring First Nations’ voices and perspectives are heard, while the
Australian Submarine Agency also continues to increase cultural understanding and
awareness in the nuclear-powered submarine enterprise.
The Australian Submarine Agency is also committed to continuing and enhancing
engagement and consultation with local environmental groups, including to maintain
transparency over development approvals, construction, operation and radioactive waste
management activities.
OFFICIAL
