Australian Government response to the
Community Affairs References Committee report:
Excess Mortality
AUGUST 2025
Overview
The Australian Government provides the following responses to the recommendations from
the Community Affairs References Committee report into Excess Mortality as well as the
dissenting recommendations. Recommendations have been grouped thematically to provide
a comprehensive response.
The Australian Government is already working towards many recommendations in the report.
Many of the dissenting recommendations have been previously addressed in submissions to
the Inquiry from the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS), the Australian Institute of Health
and Welfare (AIHW) and the Department of Health, Disability and Ageing and there is no
further information that can be added.
2
Responses to recommendations
Group 1 – Australian Bureau of Statistics and Data related recommendations
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the Australian Bureau of Statistics:
• include geographic indicators in its excess mortality estimates; and
• address gaps in the production and publication of data on excess mortality among
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, people with disability, and people in rural
and regional areas.
The Australian Government accepts this recommendation.
The ABS produces excess mortality estimates that are methodologically robust and meet
community needs. The ABS has produced excess mortality estimates at the national level, by
state and territory and by selected age groups.
The ABS released weekly and annual excess mortality estimates for deaths occurring in
Australia by remoteness areas1 on 28 February 2025. Data is reported by date of death
occurrence and remoteness area analysis. The analysis includes all deaths that occurred by
31 December 2023 and registered by 31 October 2024.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander data
The ABS has an ongoing work program to enhance the quality of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander mortality data. A key focus is to improve the accuracy of Indigenous identification by
using multiple sources of information to understand if a deceased person was of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander origin. When the ABS introduces an additional source for deriving
Indigenous status – as it has done recently – this generally changes the total number of deaths
by Indigenous status, usually by increasing the reported number of deaths of both Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people and non-Indigenous people and decreasing the number of
deaths where the Indigenous status is unknown.
For reports on Excess Deaths, the ABS will need several years of quality Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander mortality data where Indigenous status has been derived consistently to
calculate good quality estimates of excess mortality. The ABS do not currently have this time
series and so cannot currently produce reliable estimates of excess mortality for Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people.
The ABS will continue to work with stakeholders to improve the quality of mortality data for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
1 The five remoteness classes are: major cities, inner regional, outer regional, remote and
very remote.
3
Disability data
Information on disability is not collected as part of the death registration process, unless the
disability itself caused or contributed to death and was certified as such by the medical
practitioner. The ABS cannot produce estimates of excess mortality for people with disability
from the existing mortality data.
Agencies across the Australian Government including the ABS, Department of Social Services
and the AIHW have collaborated to create the National Disability Data Asset (NDDA). The
NDDA links de-identified data from federal and jurisdictional agencies about individuals with
and without disability. The aim is to have a resource which provides insights into the lives of
people with disability and improves reporting outcomes for people with disability under
Australia’s Disability Strategy 2021-2031. The NDDA includes mortality data and may provide
insights into mortality for people with disability in future. The first release of the NDDA was
made available in December 2024 to approved researchers. More data will be available
throughout 2025 and the NDDA is expected to be fully operational in 2026. Researchers may
apply for access by contacting the ABS at ndda@abs.gov.au.
Dissenting Recommendation – Senator Rennick – Recommendation 1
The Australian Bureau of Statistics needs to track and report vaccination status.
The Australian Government does not support this recommendation.
The Department of Health, Disability and Ageing is the data custodian of the Australian
Immunisation Register (AIR) which reports and tracks vaccination status of the population.
The AIR data is provided to the ABS frequently to link with other Commonwealth administered
data sets for access by government agencies and researchers. An example of a project that
integrates AIR and the ABS’ Person Level Integrated Data Asset (PLIDA) is “Understanding
socio-demographic cohorts in the COVID-19 Vaccines Strategy (2021)”. Details about this and
other PLIDA projects are available from the ABS (https://www.abs.gov.au/about/data-
services/data-integration/integrated-data/person-level-integrated-data-asset-
plida/plidamadip-research-projects).
Dissenting Recommendation – Senator Babet – Recommendation 3
Integrated data assets held by the AIHW and ABS which include both mortality data and the
Australian Immunisation Register data should have been reviewed throughout the pandemic
to review any possible connection between higher-than-expected all-cause mortality and
COVID-19 vaccination. These same data assets must be made available for independent
analysis of vaccination status and mortality.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Department of Health, Disability and Ageing has made AIR data available through both
the ABS and AIHW. The department has also analysed mortality by vaccination status using
4
integrated data assets held by the ABS throughout the pandemic. Direct access to these data
assets is managed by the ABS and AIHW.
Death registry information is also available through the ABS’ Person Level Integrated Data
Asset (PLIDA). AIR data and Death Registrations from State and Territory registrars is available
to approved researchers through the safe and secure ABS DataLab facility. Researchers can
apply to access this and other PLIDA datasets through the ABS myDATA portal
(https://mydataportal.abs.gov.au/). This facility enables ongoing research into Excess
Mortality.
The AIHW’s COVID-19 Register (https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports-data/covid-linked-data-
set), which contains information about all-cause mortality and COVID-19 vaccination, is
available to researchers for independent analysis of vaccination status and mortality.
Researchers can access information on the COVID-19 Register project approval process on
AIHWs website (https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports-data/covid-linked-data-set/accessing-
the-data).
Dissenting Recommendation – Senator Babet – Recommendation 5
During a declared pandemic, mortality data should be available to researchers and the
general public. The ABS should report monthly mortality data by age, sex and cause of death,
which would enable additional analyses on a more regular basis, which can inform policy.
Data should be freely available to users, enabling engagement with a range of experts to
facilitate a quicker and more in-depth understanding of the impacts of epidemics going
forward.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
This information is available from the ABS. The ABS publishes regular Provisional Mortality
Statistics reports which includes weekly and monthly analysis on mortality data by age, sex,
cause of death and jurisdiction. These reports are published monthly (except for January) and
are available via the public ABS website (http://www.abs.gov.au). The ABS first published
these reports in mid-2020 in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The ABS also produces custom requests for stakeholders who require further information.
Custom requests are cost recovered.
Dissenting Recommendation – Senator Babet – Recommendation 4
When dealing with a provisionally approved drug, deaths in interim mortality reporting should
be analysed by vaccination status by integrating the AIR data, not just relying on death
certificates.
Dissenting Recommendation – Senator Babet – Recommendation 9
5
According to official data, deaths of young women continue to run at far higher than expected
levels, whereas young men do not. The cause/s of this alarming and consistent trend must be
immediately identified.
The Australian Government notes these recommendations (Senator Babet Recommendations
4 and 9).
The ABS publishes reports on cause of death by age group. The Causes of Death Australia
reports include the most comprehensive information on causes of deaths by sex and age
group. Many deaths of young people are referred to the coroner and establishing a final cause
of death can take some time.
Excess mortality in young people has decreased since 2022. ABS data shows that COVID-19
was the main contributor to excess mortality of young people in 2022. In the ABS submission
to the Inquiry into Excess Mortality included the following caution on interpreting excess
mortality in young people:
“While there is some excess mortality recorded for the younger groups across 2020-
2022, there are small numbers of deaths in these age groups and a large amount of
variability in the expected range. This means that the excess mortality percentages in
these age groups may reflect natural variation in mortality patterns rather than
statistically significant excess mortality.”
The ABS findings on excess deaths among young females are supported by the AIHW.
6
Group 2 – COVID reviews
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the Australian Government task the Department of Health,
Disability and Ageing with reviewing Australia’s public health information communication
strategies during the COVID-19 pandemic, to improve the delivery of future public health
communication.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government is working to improve the delivery of future public health
information. The Department of Health, Disability and Ageing is developing a National Health
Literacy Strategy to improve the health literacy environment in Australia as well as individuals’
self-care capabilities. This Strategy aims to transform the health literacy environment to
enhance the ability of people and communities to make informed decisions about their health
and wellbeing through access to evidence-based, person-centred, and culturally and
linguistically appropriate information.
Additionally, the Australian Centre for Disease Control (CDC) will have a role in developing
communication strategies to deliver public health communication during a health emergency.
A communication strategy has been developed for the interim CDC as it transitions to an
independent entity. This strategy provides a foundation for effective communication to
establish the Australian CDC as a trusted, expert, independent public health authority.
The strategy offers an evidence-informed approach to communication and prioritises building
public trust and credibility, articulating the CDC’s role in public health, and showcasing its
data-driven capabilities in response to health threats.
The CDC will work in partnership with priority population groups, state and territory
governments and others to tailor and target timely, inclusive health messaging on disease
threats and issues.
Dissenting Recommendation – Senator Babet Recommendation 1
The federal government must establish a royal commission to examine the Australian
response to the COVID-19 pandemic and the consequential impacts on the Australian
community. States and Territories should pass complementary legislation that would enable
them to participate in the Royal Commission. The terms of reference for the Royal
Commission should be adopted from the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs’ COVID-19 Royal Commission inquiry report.
The Government does not support this recommendation.
This recommendation replicates recommendations in the inquiry into the appropriate terms
of reference for a COVID-19 Royal Commission report
7
(https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Legal_and_Constitu
tional_Affairs/COVID19RC47/Report/List_of_recommendations).
There have been numerous reviews and research into the Commonwealth Government and
state and territory governments’ responses to COVID-19. The Commonwealth Government
COVID-19 Response Inquiry, led by an independent panel of experts, built on these reviews
and was a comprehensive analysis of the Commonwealth response to the pandemic. In
October 2024, the Inquiry report was published with nine guiding recommendations and 26
actions for both short and longer-term work to improve Australia’s preparedness for future
pandemics.
The Australian Government is considering the Inquiry report before responding.
Dissenting Recommendation – Senator Babet – Recommendation 10
An appropriate independent body should undertake comprehensive review (including with
bereaved families) of every report of death following COVID-19 vaccination. This body should
also undertake investigations of each serious adverse event following immunisation (AEFI)
report to pharmacovigilance authorities including interviewing each patient and undertaking
additional specialised testing where possible. All AEFI reports (including those not deemed
“serious”) should be individually followed-up to determine the long-lasting consequences of
their vaccine reactions (which may include death).
The Australian Government does not support this recommendation.
Adverse event data is made available to the public though the Database of Adverse Event
Notifications (DAEN) – medicines. The Australian Government was open and transparent
about COVID-19 vaccine safety during its roll-out. For more than two years, the Therapeutic
Goods Administration (TGA) published a regular COVID-19 vaccine safety report, initially
weekly and then fortnightly.
The safety of the COVID-19 vaccines currently registered in Australia was assessed by the TGA
through analysis of large in vivo studies (clinical trials) with tens of thousands of individuals.
This has since been supported by real-world data from billions of individuals.
Mechanisms for coronial enquiry into deaths, including those which might be attributed to
vaccine adverse events, exist in all states and territories of Australia and an independent body
as proposed in Recommendation 10 would both exceed Commonwealth jurisdiction and
duplicate these systems. Such an enquiry would involve analysis of large amounts of private
medical information which the Commonwealth would not normally access or have
procedures to handle.
8
Group 3 – Compensation
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that the Australian Government consider the design and
compensation arrangements of a no-fault compensation scheme for Commonwealth-funded
vaccines in response to a future pandemic event.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
This recommendation will be addressed through the Government response to the
Commonwealth Government COVID-19 Response Inquiry.
Dissenting Recommendation – Senator Babet – Recommendation 6
Extend the COVID-19 Vaccine Claims Scheme and fully review its terms to ensure that victims
are adequately compensated.
The Australian Government does not support this recommendation.
The Australian Government established the COVID-19 Vaccine Claims Scheme on
13 December 2021 as a no-fault, time-limited claims scheme to respond to the
unprecedented immediate circumstances of the COVID-19 pandemic. As agreed by
Government in the 2023-24 Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook, the scheme closed to new
claims on 30 September 2024. Claims submitted by that date continue to be assessed in line
with the Scheme Policy.
The Australian Government is working to improve vaccine rollout in the future. The interim
Australian CDC led the development of the National Immunisation Strategy 2025–30
(Strategy) in collaboration with key partners, including States and Territories.
The new Strategy outlines a vision and mission to reduce the health impacts of vaccine
preventable diseases. It contains priority areas and strategic goals, providing a roadmap for
action over the next five years.
The Strategy prioritises the implementation of sustainable reform in vaccine program
governance, program delivery and accountability. It focuses on supporting policies that help
to improve public confidence in vaccines, and signals the intent to explore the feasibility of
establishing a no-fault compensation scheme that covers all National Immunisation Program
vaccines.
Dissenting Recommendation – Senator Rennick – Recommendation 4
Pharmaceutical companies should be held responsible for their products. They should be
liable for adverse events.
9
Dissenting Recommendation – Senator Rennick – Recommendation 5
People were disabled by COVID-19 vaccines. In many cases, lives were destroyed. Australians
who are unable to live a full and fulfilling life, after doing what they thought was best based
on Government advice or to save their livelihoods, should be adequately compensated, not
given a hollow promise that it will be considered in the future.
Dissenting Recommendation – Senator Babet – Recommendation 8
In the interest of transparency, existing contracts containing indemnification clauses should
be release publicly as they create an unquantifiable contingent liability for Australian
taxpayers.
The Australian Government notes these recommendations (Senator Rennick
Recommendations 4 and 5 and Senator Babet Recommendation 8).
10
Group 4 – Therapeutic Goods Administration
Dissenting Recommendation – Senator Rennick – Recommendation 2
The Therapeutic Goods Administration must acknowledge that their testing of the COVID-19
vaccines was insufficient and work to lift their quality assurance.
Dissenting Recommendation – Senator Rennick – Recommendation 3
Adverse events need to be recognised sooner so that faulty products can be recalled. The
Australian people should not have their injuries gaslighted.
The Australian Government does not support these recommendations (Senator Rennick
Recommendations 2 and 3).
The Government rejects any assertion that the TGA’s assessment of COVID-19 vaccines was
insufficient. The claim that the TGA ‘gaslights’ people who have experienced an adverse event
is incorrect and not reflective of publicly available evidence.
The TGA comprehensively evaluated each COVID-19 vaccine to ensure that they meet
Australia's high standards of safety, quality, and efficacy. Evaluation is based on clinical, non-
clinical and toxicological studies, and chemistry, risk management and manufacturing
information.
A vaccine is only approved by the TGA if this rigorous assessment process is completed, and
the benefits of the vaccine are greater than any potential risks. Once a vaccine has been
approved, the TGA has robust processes for the ongoing monitoring of the safety of that
product. This post-market safety surveillance system enables the TGA to rapidly detect,
investigate and respond to emerging safety issues. Many of these processes were enhanced
significantly for COVID-19 vaccines, making it the most intensive safety monitoring of
therapeutic goods ever conducted in Australia.
Extensive independent testing was conducted on all batches of the COVID-19 vaccines
released for supply to the Australian public. This included testing for composition, strength,
purity, integrity, identity and endotoxin. All batches released for supply in Australia met the
quality requirements. The TGA has not identified any safety signals that may relate to a quality
issue for any COVID-19 vaccine.
11
Group 5 – Procedural
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the Australian Government establish the Australian Centre
for Disease Control as soon as practicable.
The Australian Government accepts this recommendation.
On 29 October 2024, the Australian Government announced it is investing $251.7 million to
improve Australia’s ability to prepare for, and respond to, public health challenges through
the creation of the Australian CDC. The CDC will be established as an independent agency,
separate to the Department of Health, Disability and Ageing, from 1 January 2026, subject to
the passage of legislation. This builds on the interim CDC, established on 1 January 2024, as
part of the Australian Government’s commitment to establishing a CDC in a phased approach.
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends that the Senate take note of the following:
• witness participation in public hearings is critical to the committee inquiry process;
• all witnesses who participate in committee public hearings should be treated with
respect;
• Senators should be reminded of the Resolution on the Broadcasting of Senate and
Committee Proceedings
The Australian Government accepts this recommendation.
The Australian Government is committed to respecting the process and outcomes of Senate
Inquiries.
Dissenting Recommendation – Senator Babet – Recommendation 2
Committees must be made to justify in detail the reasons why each individual submission is
not uploaded publicly. All efforts must be made to publish submissions publicly, even if some
redaction is necessary.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation. Submissions are only published after
a decision by the committee. Submissions are not automatically accepted and published. A
committee may reject a submission that is not relevant to its inquiry. For more information,
contact the Senior Clerk of Committees (seniorclerk.committees.sen@aph.gov.au) or the
relevant committee secretary.
12
