Australian Government response to the
Joint Standing Committee on the National Disability Insurance
Scheme report:
Inquiry into Independent Assessments
February 2023
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the Joint Standing Committee on the National Disability
Insurance Scheme’s (the Committee’s) report on its Inquiry into Independent Assessments.
The report contains six recommendations going to broader matters of financial sustainability,
approaches to co-design and consultation, and bulk-billed appointments with medical and allied
health professionals.
The Government is committed to working alongside the disability community to improve
outcomes for people with disability.
The Government supports or supports-in-principle two recommendations made in the Report.
Four recommendations are noted, with two of these considered in the review of the design,
operation and sustainability of the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS or the
Scheme) which commenced in late 2022.
Implementation of the Government response has already commenced with legislation to embed
a co-design approach to the NDIS passing through Parliament in April 2022 with bipartisan
support. The Government will also work in partnership with those with lived experience of
disability through both the NDIS Review, and the Independent Advisory Council (IAC) and
disability representatives, on the co-design of a new person-centred model that delivers
consistency and equity in access and planning outcomes, consistent with the legislative
requirements for assessments as set out under the Act.
2
Inquiry into Independent Assessments
Recommendations made by the Committee
1. The Commonwealth Government implement the National Disability Insurance Scheme
Reserve Fund as soon as practicably possible.
Recommendation 1 – Noted
The Government notes this issue is currently being considered by the Council on Federal
Financial Relations as part of broader consideration of existing funding arrangements
between the Commonwealth and the states and territories.
2. The Commonwealth Government amend the National Disability Insurance Scheme Act
2013 to include a specific commitment to and definition of co-design, following
extensive consultation on what ‘co-design’ should be.
Recommendation 2 – Supported in principle
The Government is committed to co-design as a meaningful, joint collaboration with
participants, their carers and families to resolve some of the challenges facing the Scheme.
The Government will consider further specificity around the definition of ‘co-design’
following the outcome of further consultations with the disability community.
3. Consultations with medical and allied health professionals for the purposes of access to
the National Disability Insurance Scheme and to support requests for items in NDIS
plans be:
 carried out by health professionals nominated by participants and/or their nominees,
where appropriate and available;
 holistic, taking into account medical reports and other contextual information as
appropriate; and
 multidisciplinary, involving consultation with multiple experts who treat and have
treated the person.
Recommendations 3 – Noted for NDIS Review to consider
The Government has commenced a review of the design, operation and sustainability of the
NDIS, with a focus on improving all aspects of the participant experience. The Review will
consider a wide range of issues, including the contributions that health professionals who are
experienced in the diagnosis and management of disability make in the access and planning
process.
3
4. Where consultations with medical and allied health professionals for the purposes of
access to the National Disability Insurance Scheme or to support requests for items in
NDIS plans cannot be carried out by appropriate professionals nominated by a participant
and/or their nominee:
 The National Disability Insurance Agency implement an accreditation process for
appropriate professionals to carry out consultations for those in the circumstances
described above;
 The National Disability Insurance Agency ensure that these assessments are holistic
and multidisciplinary; and
 The National Disability Insurance Agency implement specific, targeted strategies to
ensure that particular cohorts are not disadvantaged by such a process.
Recommendation 4 – Noted
The Government is currently co-designing improvements to the access and planning pathway
with the disability sector. The Government has worked with the disability sector to develop the
terms of reference for the review of the NDIS. Both of these processes will include a range of
approaches to person-centred assessments in their consideration, including the role of medical
and allied health professionals.
5. The Australian Government consider funding bulk-billed consultations with medical and
allied health professionals for the purposes described in Recommendation 3 and
Recommendation 4.
Recommendation 5 - Noted for NDIS Review to consider
Under the Health Insurance Act 1973, Medicare benefits are only payable for clinically
relevant services, which are reasonably required for the management of the patient’s medical
condition and provided by an appropriate health practitioner.
While the Government has no capability to compel health professionals to bulk bill MBS
services provided to NDIS clients, the Government notes this recommendation and has
referred it to the NDIS Review for further consideration.
6. All assessment tools that the National Disability Insurance Agency proposes, for the
purposes of funded assessments to access the National Disability Insurance Scheme and
to help inform funding decisions, should be subject to rigorous consultation with people
with disability, Disability Representative Organisations, and relevant health and allied
health practitioners before the National Disability Insurance Agency decides to
implement them.
Recommendation 6 – Supported
The Government will continue to engage with the disability community on improvements to
the access and planning pathway and through the NDIS Review. Any proposed person-centred
assessments will be co-designed with the disability community.
4
