OFFICIAL
Australian Government
Australian Government response to the
HouseofRepresentatives Standing Committee on Social
Policy and Legal Affairs report:
Inquiry into family violence orders
JULY 2025
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Help and Support
This response contains content on violence against women and children, and may be
distressing to read for victim-survivors offamily, domestic and sexualviolence.
Free advice and supportis available online and via telephone through the following
services:
1800RESPECT(1800 737 732)is available for free, 24 hours a day, 7 days a weekto
support people impacted by domestic, family or sexual violence
Lifeline crisis support line 13 11 14
Relationships Australia 1300 385 578
Kids Helpline 1800 55 1800
Mensline Australia 1300 78 99 78
Men’sReferral Service 1300 766 491.
Eachstate andterritory also has a dedicatedcrisis line providing family violence
support:
New South Wales Domestic Violence Line 1800 656 463
Queensland DVConnect Womensline 1800 811 811
Victoria Safe Steps crisis response line 1800 015 188
Australian Capital Territory Domestic Violence Crisis Service 02 6280 0900
Tasmania Family Violence Counselling and Support Service 1800 608 122
South Australia Domestic Violence Crisis Line 1800 800 098
Western Australia Women's Domestic Violence Helpline 1800 007 339.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomesthe House ofRepresentatives Standing Committee on
Social Policy and Legal Affairs’ (the Committee) final report on the inquiry into family
violence orders. Uponreferral from the then Attorney-General, the Hon Mark Dreyfus KC
MP, the Committee examinedthe barriers to safety, fairness and access for victim-survivors
offamily, domestic and sexual violence (FDSV) navigating the state and territory family
violence order (FVO) system and the federal family law system.
The Government is committed to ending gender-based violence, and supports the
Committee’s assessmentthat a long-term, systematic approach is needed to increase safety
for women andchildren as they navigate family separation and provide stronger and more
consistentprotections for victim-survivors, in line withtheNationalPlan to End Violence
Against Women andChildren 2022-2032. The Committee’s reporthighlights the need for
ongoing reforms and enhancementofcross-cutting initiatives across federal and state and
territory courts, law enforcement and frontline services, resulting in the Committee making
11 recommendationsto address these key issues.
The Governmenthas carefully considered these recommendations and agreesinprinciple to 7
recommendations, agrees inpart to 3 recommendations and has noted one recommendation.
Ending violence against womenand childrenis apriority forthe Government, with an
investment ofover $4 billionto advance women’ssafety initiatives since September 2024.
This funding will go some wayto supporting the Committee’s recommendations, including
through commitments to enhance information sharing and pilot measures to improve police
responsesto high-risk and serial perpetrators offamily and domestic violence (FDV).
The Government’s response to the Committee’s report reflects the importance ofa
coordinated and cross-sectoral approach to protecting women and children experiencing
violence and ensuring enhanced protections and access to support and services for
victim-survivors navigating legal systems.
The Government thanks the Committee forthe inquiry and resulting recommendations, as
well as individuals and organisations who provided submissions to the Committee,
particularly victim-survivors who bravely shared their lived experiences.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Summary ofthe Government’s response to the recommendations
Recommendation Response
Recommendation 1 Agree in part
Recommendation 2 Agreein principle
Recommendation 3 Agree inprinciple
Recommendation 4 Agreeinprinciple
Recommendation 5 Agreeinprinciple
Recommendation 6 Agreein principle
Recommendation 7 Agree inprinciple
Recommendation 8 Agree inpart
Recommendation 9 Noted
Recommendation 10 Agree in part
Recommendation 11 Agreeinprinciple
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Australian Government Response to the Recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommendsthat, in the next Parliament, the Australian Government
workwith the states and territories to increase the visibility ofviolent offenders across
jurisdictions through the National Domestic Violence Order Scheme (NDVOS). NDVOS
should enable and require real-time updating offamily violence orders (FVOs),
conditions and breaches.
Agree inpart
The Australian Government is committedto working with states andterritories to deliver
innovative new approachesto better identify high-riskperpetrators.
The National Criminal Intelligence System (NCIS)is anational information sharing
capability whichprovides law enforcement andintelligence agencies across Australia with
nearreal time access to law enforcement information and criminal intelligence. NCIS
contributes to a safer Australia byproviding police officers with access to key information
from multiple agencies and systemson a single national database, allowing them to see
relevantrisk information such as domestic and family violence orders, incident and offence
history, warnings and warrants.
In September 2024, National Cabinet agreed to enhance the NCISto provide a ‘warning flag’
to betteridentify high-riskperpetrators ofFDV andassistpolice responses. This workwill be
progressed by the Attorney-General’s Departmentinpartnership with the Australian Criminal
Intelligence Commission (ACIC)and in collaboration with states andterritories, throughthe
FDSV Working Group, which includesjustice and police representatives from all states and
territories.
The Governmentis undertaking anational review ofDomestic Violence Order (DVO)
frameworks, which includes the scope ofthe National Domestic Violence Order Scheme
(NDVOS). TheNDVOSfacilitates the automatic mutual recognition and enforcement of
orders nationally, ensuring visibility oforders and their associated conditions; however,
timing for provisioning varies. The review will considerexisting gaps and identify
opportunities forpotential reform acrossjurisdictions to ensure that domestic violence
frameworksare fit forpurpose. The review will also consider relevant findings and
recommendations ofthis inquiry. The Attorney-General’s Departmentis leading the review
in close consultation with the states andterritories. A report is expected to be provided to
both the Standing Council ofAttorneys-General (SCAG) and Police Ministers Council
(PMC)by June 2026.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommendsthat, in the next Parliament, the Attorney-General work
with the states and territories to develop and implement a community education
program to raise awareness ofhow FVOsare recognised and enforced across Australia
through NDVOS,andthelegal intersection between FVOsand parenting orders.
Agree inprinciple
The Australian Governmenthas published community education materials on the
Attorney-General’s Department’s website to increase understanding ofthe operation ofFVOs
through the NDVOS,since its commencement on 25 November 2017. The materials
comprise avideo and brochure, which has beentranslated into 36 languages, and provide an
overview ofhow FVOsare recognised and enforced across all participatingjurisdictions.
This is further supported by links to relevant state and territory contacts. Each state and
territory has madejurisdiction-specific information about FVOsandtheir enforcement
publicly available. The current national review ofDVO frameworks, which includes the
scope ofthe NDVOS,mayidentify further opportunities to review and share these materials,
in additionto currentpromotional efforts.
The Governmenthas also funded the Family Violence Law Help website, hosted byNational
Legal Aid (NLA), which provides information about making arrangements for children when
there is an existing FVO, and what happens whenthere is aparenting orderinplace priorto
an FVObeing sought.
The Federal Circuit and Family Court ofAustralia (FCFCOA)provides publicly available
information on its website about FVOs,including high-level information abouthowto apply
forthem and information about the legal intersection between FVOsand parenting orders.
The Governmenthasalso published the Parenting Orders Handbook,a guide for separating
parents to agree clear, safe and workable arrangementsin the bestinterests oftheir children.
The Handbookis available on the Government’s Family Relationships Online website and
referenced on the FCFCOA website. It includes practical advice aboutthe legal intersection
between FVOsand parenting orders. The Attorney-General’s Department is in the process of
updating the Handbookto reflect recent legislative amendments, and will consider
opportunities to further promote community awarenessofthis resource oncefinalised.
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommendsthat, in the next Parliament, the Attorney-General
advocate for, and assist all states andterritories to:
e adopt nationally harmonised:
o legal definitions offamily, domestic and sexualviolence (FDSV)
o family violence laws and consistency in access, application processes and
enforcement, and messaging ofFVO requirements
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
allow children and young people to apply for FVOs and to be named as
protected persons on FVOs
rapidly improvepolice responses to reports ofFDSV andpolice recognition of
coercive control, including:
o the capacity ofpolice to make own-motion FVOs
© minimising the risk ofmisidentification ofvictim-survivors as primary
perpetrators and systems abuse
o implementing culturally safe and trauma informed models ofresponse
o improving knowledgeofthe legal intersection between FVOs and parenting
orders, and the obligation for police to assistvictim-survivors to obtain FVOs
and respond to breaches ofFVOs in matters involving children where the
statutory basis is met
ensure information, application forms and court proceedingsare accessible for
First Nations and culturally or linguistically diverse people, those with low
digital literacy skills or poor online access, or whoare livingwith disability
makecourt proceedings safer by:
© supporting all applicants to participate in hearings remotely ifthey wish
© ensuring there are safe entrances and waiting areas, and safety protocols in
all courts for applicants in FDSV matters
make amendmentsto laws to require courts making orvarying an FVO to
considervarying parenting orders to prioritise the safety ofvictim-survivors and
children undersection 68R ofthe Family Law Act 1975, and to notify the court
that madetheoriginal parenting orderifthe parenting order is varied
include an option to apply for changes to parenting orders in application forms
for FVOs.
Agree inprinciple
The Australian Government recognises the importance ofengaging with evolving
understandings ofFDSV,improvingpolice responses to FDSV, making courtprocesses safer
and more accessible forall victim-survivors, and streamlining intersections between FVOs
and parenting orders.
The Attorney-General’s Department is currently conducting anational review ofDVO
frameworks, including the NDVOS,in consultation withthe states andterritories. The review
will consider existing gaps and identify opportunities for potential reform acrossjurisdictions
to ensure that domestic violence frameworksare fit forpurpose. The reviewwill also
considerrelevant findings and recommendationsofthis inquiry.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Section 68R ofthe FamilyLawAct 1975 empowersstate and territory courts to amend
parenting orders during FVO proceedings and notify the family court as required. Any
amendments to laws to require courts to consider varying parenting orders and to notify the
originating court, would be a matter for state and territory governments.
The Family Law Council (FLC)is a statutory body ofexperts appointed to provide advice to
the Attorney-General on the family law system. The current Terms ofReference require the
FLCto consider improvements in relation to evidence and procedure in family lawmatters to
ensure thatparties and children who have experienced trauma, or require additional support
to engage in the family law system, can achievejust and safe outcomes. The FLC will also
consider opportunities to improve the experience ofvulnerable parties who are, or have been,
involved in criminal proceedings, child protection proceedings, or domestic violence
proceedings, in additionto family lawproceedings. The FLCare to report on these Terms of
Reference by 30 June 2026.
Within the 2022-23 Budget, the Governmentallocated $4.1 million over 4 years to enhance
the effectiveness ofpolice responses to FDSV through the development and delivery ofa
national training and educationpackage. The package will build on existing training in the
states andterritories; seeking to enhance law enforcement’s response to FDSV,including
through increasing awarenessofcoercive control and improving recognition ofindicators that
help identify the more subtle behaviours ofFDSV,suchas the use oftechnology-facilitated
abuse. Thetraining will also include content on culturally safe policing and trauma informed
response models aimed at minimising re-traumatisation.It is anticipated that training will
commencerolling out nationally in early 2026.
The FCFCOAis independent from the Government. The FCFCOAis responsible forits
operations, including court access and security, and is focused on safety in family lawmatters
before the Courts, including provision for safetyplans and safe roomsforvulnerable litigants
to the extentpossible. States and territories are responsible for matters relating to accessibility
and safety in state andterritory courts.
As ownerofthe Commonwealth Law Courts, the Department ofFinance undertakes
comprehensive disability access audits inpublic areas underits control at the Commonwealth
Law Courts on a five-yearcycle to ensure alignment with current accessibility codes and
standards. The next auditperiod is 2025-26. Audit findings are incorporated into the
Department ofFinances’ forward capital works planning. In 2022-23 the department
completed $3.7 million ofworks to improve accessibility.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommendsthat, in the next Parliament, the Australian Government
increase the Federal Circuit and Family Court ofAustralia (FCFCOA)’s capacity to
identify, respond and expedite high-risk FDSV andchild abuse matters, including:
e reducing wait times and overall costs forvictim-survivors
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
e extending Lighthouse andthe co-location program
e enhancing the support provided in Evatt List matters
e supporting research into the circumstances where re-screening for FDSV risk in
Lighthouse would be appropriate.
Agree inprinciple
The Governmentsupports the expedient identification of, and response to, FDSV andchild
abuse matters inthe family law courts, and has providedsignificant funding to the FCFCOA
to help facilitate the effective handling ofthese matters. This includes:
e $55 million over4 years from 2022-23 to continue and expand the FCFCOA’s
Lighthouse program
e $23.8 million over4 years from 2024-25 to engage additional court staffto assist
with delivering the National Strategic Framework for Information Sharing between
the Family Law and Family Violence and Child Protection Systemsandits
Co-Location Program (National Framework). This is complemented by additional
fundingto the states andterritories to deliver the National Framework.
On 6 September 2024, National Cabinet agreed to improve information sharing about
perpetrators across systems andjurisdictions. To supportthis, the Governmentwill be
expanding the National Frameworkto apply to property-only and spousal maintenance
proceedings, as well as proceedings underPart 3 ofthe Family Law (Child Abduction
Convention) Regulations 1986 inrelation to ‘incoming’ cases (involving a request forthe
return ofa child abducted to, or retained in, Australia) initiated in the family law courts.
Lighthouse, including the Evatt List, is funded underthe NationalPlan to End Violence
Against Women andChildren 2022-2032, with funding expiring on 30 June 2026. Decisions
regarding future funding for the FCFCOA,and related research, are a matter for Government.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommendsthe Australian Government continue to lead the
development and implementation ofan enhanced national FDSVrisk and information
sharing framework, with the goalofestablishing, in the next Parliament, a live
dashboardthat all decision-makers in FDSV and child abuse matters can access, noting:
e the information sharing framework should go beyond court-initiated orders and
the self-disclosure ofparties and include existing FVOs and breaches, criminal
matters, child protection issues, family law orders, and other information
relating to FDSV andchild abuse risks
e the risk assessment principles and framework must address systems abuse and
the abuseorrisk ofharm to animals, and provide strong referral pathways
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
e consideration should be given to expanding information-sharing beyond current
information-sharing protocols, with appropriate safeguards.
Agree inprinciple
Significant work is progressing throughNational Cabinet and multiple ministerial councils to
enhancenational FDSV risk assessment and information sharing.
On 6 September 2024, National Cabinet agreed on several new approachesto better identify
high-risk perpetrators, share information about them across systems and state boundaries, and
interveneearlier to stop violence escalating. National Cabinet agreed to increase and extend
two-way information sharing betweenthe family law courts and state and territory courts,
child protection, policing and firearms agencies under the National Framework and
Co-location Program until 30 June 2028. The Australian Governmentwill also be funding a
feasibility and design study ofatechnological solution to support information sharing
betweenthe family law courts and state andterritory courts. Any further expansion to the
Information Sharing Framework, including as recommendedbythis inquiry, will be
considered through the statutory reviews required to be conducted after commencement of
the relevant legislation.
National Cabinet also agreed to develop new national best-practice FDV risk assessment
principles and amodelbest-practice risk assessment framework.
The Government has committed $2.0 million over 3 years from 2024-25 to deliver the model
risk assessment framework, which will support improved national consistency and efficacy in
how FDVrisksare identified, assessed and managed. This initiative is being led by the
Department ofSocial Services.
Work on new national bestpractice FDV risk assessmentprinciples is being led by
Australia’s National Research Organisation for Women’s Safety Limited (ANROWS). The
newprincipleswill be incorporated into the model best-practice risk assessment framework,
which will focus on strengtheningjurisdictions’ consistency ofpractice and system responses
to FDV.
To supportjurisdictions’ implementation ofthe model best-practice risk assessment
framework, on 7 February 2025 the Data and Digital Ministers Meeting (DDMM)agreed to
commenceaproject to produce national guidance to enable bestpractice FDV information
sharing, on its FourthNational Data Sharing Work Program, underNational Cabinet’s
Intergovernmental Agreement on Data Sharing.
In addition, underthe National Strategy to Prevent and Respond to Child Sexual Abuse
2021-2030, all Australian governments agreed to work together to enhance national
arrangements for sharing child safety and wellbeing information.
10
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommendsthat, in the next Parliament, the Australian Government
introduce measures to improve the safety ofvictim-survivors ofFDSV at court during
family law proceedings, including:
e ensuring victim-survivors can attend court appointments remotely where there
are safety concerns
e meeting accessibility requirements for people with disability
e ensure court facilities have adequate safe rooms, safe zones andsecurity staff
e enhanced protocols and training about safety planning forvictim-survivors of
FDSV.
Agree inprinciple
The Australian Government recognisesthat the safety ofvictim-survivors should be
paramount when engaging withthe family law courts. The Family Violence Law Help
website hosted byNLA, provides information about safety at court, including how to develop
a safety plan.
The FCFCOAis independent from the Government. The FCFCOAis responsible forits
operations and is focused on safety in family law matters before the Courts, including
provision for safetyplans and safe rooms for vulnerablelitigants to the extent possible.
The DepartmentofFinanceis responsible for ensuring disability access inpublic areas within
the Commonwealth Law Courts. The FCFCOAis responsible for ensuringthat court services
are accessible to people with disability. The Department ofFinance undertakes
comprehensive disability access audits at the Commonwealth Law Courts on a five-year
cycle to ensure alignment with current accessibility codes and standards. The next audit
period is 2025-26. Audit findings are incorporated into the departments’ forward capital
worksplanning.
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommendsthat, in the next Parliament, the Australian Government
introduce measures to improvethe accessibility ofFCFCOA proceedings and the
support provided to vulnerable groups, including:
e supporting individuals with low English and/or digital literacy to complete
relevant online forms such as the Lighthouse triage tool and to fully engage in
court proceedings, including:
© access to interpreters when needed to ensure safety and proceduralfairness
othe translation ofinformation resources into key languages
11
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
e expanding the numberofIndigenous Family Liaison Officer positions to meet
demand
e piloting and evaluatingDisability Liaison Officer and Cultural Liaison Officer
positions within the family law jurisdiction.
Agree inprinciple
The Australian Governmentis providing significant funding for the legal assistance sectorto
support vulnerable applicants engaging in family law matters, including through a recent
$3.9 billionpackage for the legal assistance sector announced as part ofthe 6 September
2024 National Cabinet, to be delivered through theNational Access to Justice Partnership
(NAJP) from 1 July 2025. The package includes $275.7 million over 5 years to Women’s
Legal Services via a new quarantined funding stream to assist women andchildren at risk of,
or experiencing, FDSV.
The Governmentalso provided an additional $8.7 million over 4 years from 2022-23 to
increase the numberofIndigenous Family Liaison Officers and Specialist Indigenous Lists to
ensure FirstNations women and children engaging with the family court system receive
appropriately tailored support.
Targeted measures funded by the Government to support vulnerable applicants include:
e The ban on Cross-Examination ofParties Scheme, whichprovides protections for
victims offamily violence during cross-examination in family lawproceedings by
prohibiting personal cross-examination in certain circumstances, and requiring that
cross-examination be conducted by a legal representative.
e The continuation ofFamily Advocacy and Support Services (FASS), Domestic
Violence Units (DVUs) and Health Justice Partnerships (HJPs), funded underthe
NAJP from 1 July 2025, which integrate legal assistance with otherholistic support
services for individuals who have experienced family violence.
e Providing $44.5 million over3 years from 2025-26 and $15.2 million per year
ongoing to continue the FCFCOA’s enhanced family law case management system,
which will assist all family law litigants, including vulnerable groups and victims of
FDV.
The Government acknowledgesthat accessibility ofproceedings, including access to
interpreters and thetranslation ofinformation, disproportionately impacts vulnerable groups,
including First Nations people, culturally and linguistically diverse people and people with
disability. The Governmentwill continue to support the FCFCOAto work with Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander communities to design culturally appropriate supports, including
through the engagementofIndigenous Family Liaison Officers and the operation ofthe
Specialist IndigenousLists.
Court forms, accessibility and interpreter arrangements are operational matters for the
FCFCOA.Decisions regarding future funding for the FCFCOA,including funding for
12
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Indigenous Family Liaison Officers which expires on 30 June 2026,are a matter for
Government.
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommendsthat, during the next Parliament, the Australian
Government amendsection 114AB ofthe Family Law Act 1975 to ensure that the family
law courts are empowered to makepersonal protection injunctions (PPIs) where
necessary to protect victim-survivors and children.
The Australian Government should workwith the states and territories to resolve
enforceability issues and consider developing amendmentsto the Act that criminalise
breachesofPPIs.
Agree inpart
UnderAustralia’s federal system ofgovernment, the primary responsibility for family
violence and criminal matters rests withthe states and territories, with each managing their
own law enforcement andjustice systems.
The Australian Government is committed to improving protection for those affected by
family violence and, as such, the injunctionprovisions remain in the FamilyLawAct 1975 as
additional protection for victims offamily violence. Currently, the FamilyLawAct 1975
empowers family law courts to make a PPI where thereis no existing state orterritory FVO
in force.
IfaPPI issued underthe FamilyLawAct 1975 is breached, the protected person mayfile an
applicationto seek an order from the family law court regarding the contravention.
Alternatively, sections 68C and 114AA ofthe FamilyLawAct 1975 provide apowerofarrest
where a person breaches a PPI. A memberofthe Australian Federal Police or a state and
territory police force may arrest apersonifthe officer believes on reasonable groundsthat the
person has breachedthe injunction by causing, or threatening to cause, bodily harm to the
personprotected by the injunction, or has harassed, molestedorstalked thatperson.
Anyproposal seeking to criminalise breaches ofPPIs would havesignificant resourcing,
funding and operational implications and would require close consideration and consultation,
including with the FCFCOA.
Recommendation 9
The Committee recommendsthat, in the next Parliament, the Australian Government
pilot and evaluate a children’s advocate position in FCFCOAto support Independent
Children’s Lawyers andensurechildren’s voices are heard during parenting matters.
Noted
13
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
The Australian Government acknowledges the importance ofappropriately engaging with
and seeking the views ofchildrento assistthe family law courts to determine parenting
arrangementsinthe best interests ofthe child. This includesthe role that social science
professionals may play in providing support and information to the Court, and to
professionals such as Independent Children’s Lawyers (ICLs).
Children can express their viewsto the family law courts through a numberofexisting
processes, including engaging with an ICL, court child expert, or otherprivate single expert
who may meetwiththe child, seek their views and provide a report to the court. The
Governmentnotes that underthe FamilyLawAct 1975, ICLs are required to ensure that any
views expressed by thechild in relationto matters relevant to the proceedings are fully put
before the court, as well as advise the court about the best interests ofthe child.
Reform to require ICLs to meet with a child and provide that child with an opportunity to
express a view cameinto effect in May 2024. A review ofthese newprovisions to ensure
they are operating as intended will form part ofthe review ofthe FamilyLawAmendmentAct
2023, which must commenceas soonaspossible after the third anniversary ofthe
commencementofthe Act.
Recommendation 10
The Committee recommendsthat, in the next Parliament, the Australian Government
lead the developmentand implementation ofa package ofreforms to eliminate
opportunities for systems abusein the family law andstate and territory FVO systems.
Development ofthe reforms should consider:
e evaluating the effectiveness ofrecent reforms to the Family Law Act 1975 and
whether further changes are needed, for example clarifying that systems abuseis
family violence in section 4AB
e developing comprehensive, culturally safe, and trauma-informed training and
resources forjudicial officers and legal professionals on the dynamics,
complexities, identification and appropriate responses to FDSV,including
financial and legal systems abuse and animal abuse,that:
o is created and delivered by subject matter experts and those with lived
experience andbe regularly evaluated
o includesspecific First Nations trainingwhich is designed and delivered in
partnership with Aboriginal Community-Controlled Organisations, as
well as specific training on the unique issues that migrant and refugee
women experience
e implementing mandatory continuing professional development forall legal
professionals engaged in FVO and family law matters
e establishing a capacity-building service forjudicial officers and other court staff
14
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
e implementing a screeningtool that identifies systems abuse and unmeritorious
applications, and developing specialised processes and interventions that enable
courts to intervene to protect victim-survivors in high-risk matters involving
systems abuse
e conducting research into the extent and impacts ofmisidentification at the
intersection ofFVO and family law proceedings and designing measuresto
strengthen the early identification and response to systems abuse
e implementing a national outcomes measurement framework to monitor the
outcomesofthe family law courts’ decisions to determine the impact on victim-
survivors. This could include reviewing decisions for instances ofsystems abuse
and misidentification.
Agree inpart
Following the National Cabinet meeting on 6 September 2024, the Australian Governmentis
conducting an audit ofCommonwealth systems to identify and remove opportunities for
systems abuse. The audit is an ongoing piece ofwork and is one mechanism through which
Governmentcan consider the weaponisation ofsystems by perpetrators ofFDV. While the
audit has an initial focus onthe child support, social security and tax systems,it is not limited
to these systems. The Governmentis also implementing the principles ofsafety by design as
part ofthe audit. Safety by design is apreventative approach to systemsdesign that aimsto
ensure safety considerations are holistically considered inthe design and operation ofsystems
and prevent abuse before it occurs.
Both the FamilyLawAmendmentAct2023 and the FamilyLawAmendmentAct2024 require
a statutory review ofthe operation ofthe amendments to ensure the newprovisionsare
operating as intended. The review ofthe FamilyLawAmendmentAct2023 will include a
review ofthe new harmful proceedings order powers which respond to systems abuse by
preventing harmful family law litigation, and the new overarching duty on parties to resolve
family lawmatters quickly, inexpensively and efficiently, otherwise cost consequences may
apply. The FamilyLawAmendmentAct 2024 included amendmentsto allowthe court to
makeorders protecting sensitive information from aperson’s attendance at health or
specialist family violence or sexualassault services from being producedorused as evidence
in court hearings, where the harm caused by this would outweighthe benefit ofthe evidence
being available to the court.
That Act also introduced provisions to allow divorce to occur without court attendance,
protecting against potentiallytraumatic or unsafe court attendance. Further, the FamilyLaw
AmendmentAct 2024 made amendments to expressly capture ‘economicor financial abuse’
within the definition offamily violence. The review ofthese Amendment Acts must
commenceas soon aspossible after 6 May 2027 and 10 June 2028, respectively, and be
completed within 12 months. The reports must be tabled in Parliament.
While responsibility for requirements for Continuing Professional Developmentforlegal
professionals sits with state and territory law societies, the Governmenthas funded the NLA,
15
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Women’s Legal Service Victoria and the FirstNations Advocates Against Family Violence
as a consortium arrangementto progress the development ofContinuing Professional
Developmenttraining for legal practitioners on Coercive Control. It is anticipated
developmentofthe training will be completed towards the end ofthe 2025-26 financialyear.
The Australian and state andterritory governments co-fund the National Domestic and
Family Violence Bench Book, whichis a resource forjudicial officers in all Australian
jurisdictions to improve understanding offamily violence. The Bench Bookcontains sections
on economic andfinancial abuse, systems abuse and animal abuse and highlights key
academic literature and cases involving these types ofabuse forjudicial officers to consider.
The Australian and state andterritory governments also co-fund the Family Violence in the
Court training program forjudicial officers. This training builds upon the Bench Book
resource andis delivered through face-to-face training seminars across Australia.
The Government contributes further funding to theNational Judicial College ofAustralia
(NJCA) and the Australasian Institute ofJudicial Administration (AIJA) to design, develop
and deliver education andtraining programsforjudicial officers across all court hierarchies
andjurisdictions, as well as educational programsforjudicial officers, court administrators
and membersofthe legal profession in relation to the administration ofjudicial systems.
In addition, the Federal Court ofAustralia and the FCFCOAalso lead the delivery ofjudicial
educationprogramswithinthe courts.
Recommendation 11
The Committee recommendsthat, in the next Parliament, the Australian Government
undertake a scoping study to explore the benefits and feasibility ofa single advocacy
support modelforvictim-survivors ofFDSV.
Agreeinprinciple
The NationalPlan to End Violence against Women andChildren 2022-2032 acknowledges
that experiences ofthe FDV support landscape can be fragmented and complex to navigate,
makingit difficult forpeople to access the supports they need. Action 4 from the First Action
Plan commits the Commonwealth andstate and territory governments to building the
capacity ofservices and systems that support victim-survivors to provide trauma-informed,
connected and coordinated responses that support long-term recovery, health and wellbeing.
16
OFFICIAL
