Australian Government response to the
Report of the Independent Review of the Australia’s Foreign
Relations (State and Territory Arrangements) Act 2020
1 SEPTEMBER 2025
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the opportunity to respond to Ms Rosemary Huxtable
AO PSM’s report on her independent review of the Australia’s Foreign Relations (State and
Territory Arrangements) Act 2020 (the Foreign Relations Act). The review was intended to
ensure the legislative framework underpinning the Foreign Arrangements Scheme (the
Scheme) is effective and responsive to an increasingly complex international environment.
The Foreign Relations Act commenced on 10 December 2020. Its purpose is to ensure that
arrangements between state or territory governments (and their entities) and foreign entities
do not adversely affect Australia's foreign relations and are not inconsistent with Australia's
foreign policy. Section 63A requires a review of the operation of the Foreign Relations Act as
soon as possible after 10 March 2024. The independent review, led by Ms Huxtable, was
announced on 21 June 2024 and took place over a seven-month period.
On 1 September 2025, the Government tabled Ms Huxtable’s report in Parliament. The report
is comprehensive and detailed with 23 recommendations that focus on administration,
governance and transparency of the Scheme and effectiveness in meeting its objectives.
The Government recognises and appreciates the work of Ms Huxtable, as well as the
engagement by and contributions of state and territory governments, local governments,
universities, peak bodies and other interested parties.
The Government agrees or agrees in principle with all of the report’s recommendations. The
Government remains committed to ensuring that arrangements with foreign countries are
consistent with Australia’s national interests. The first four years of the Scheme’s operation
have highlighted the scale and depth of that challenge, with more than 11,000 arrangements
listed on the Public Register to date. Through implementation of this response to the
independent review, the Government will strengthen and reform the Scheme to ensure it
remains fit-for-purpose and effective, including through a more targeted risk-based approach
that directs efforts and resources to where the Scheme is needed most. This will better equip
Australian state and territory governments and public universities to manage risks and benefit
from opportunities associated with their international engagement – further building
Australia’s resilience to foreign interference.
1
Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 1
Supplement the factors the Minister can consider in determining whether an arrangement
complies with the Foreign Relations Act (that an arrangement does not adversely affect
Australia’s foreign relations and is not inconsistent with Australia’s foreign policy) to
include reference to the national interest.
Response: Agreed
The Government agrees the Scheme should be broadened to consider the national interest,
including national and economic security interests. This reflects the broad view of foreign
policy taken by the Government, which encompasses national interest considerations
including, for example, matters of national security. This will require amendments to the Act.
Recommendation 2
Establish formal governance across Commonwealth Government resilience and
transparency measures, with representation from intelligence, national security and
economic agencies, to work collaboratively and share data, identify current and emerging
risks, and streamline communications with affected entities.
Response: Agreed
The Government will consider ways to strengthen the governance of the Scheme across
Australian Government agencies, including considering how existing forums can be utilised
for supporting greater collaboration between relevant agencies.
Recommendation 3
Add a general disclosure provision to the Foreign Relations Act to enable the DFAT
Secretary to communicate Scheme information within DFAT and with other
Commonwealth Government agencies, including for the purpose of administering other
resilience and transparency measures, to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the
Scheme and advance Australia’s national and foreign policy interests.
Response: Agreed
Greater ability to appropriately share information obtained under the Scheme would enable
DFAT and other Australian Government agencies to use Scheme information to enhance
decision making and advance Australia’s national interest (having regard to recommendation
1). It would also improve interoperability between Australian Government resilience and
transparency mechanisms. This will require amendments to the Act.
2
Recommendation 4
Engage formally with state and territory governments, local government and universities –
recognising their role as global players – in order to provide coordinated information on
foreign policy settings, current and emerging risks and intelligence insights (including
through the First Secretaries Group on National Security, the Trusted Information
Sharing Network and structured briefings from foreign policy and intelligence agencies).
Response: Agreed
The Government’s existing stakeholder engagement on national interest settings includes
targeted and ad hoc foreign policy and security briefings, such as through the Trusted
Information Sharing Network and the University Foreign Interference Taskforce. Relevant
Australian Government agencies will identify further opportunities to provide coordinated
information to the regulated community.
Recommendation 5
Establish a central point of support for affected entities to assist them in determining
foreign policy risk, with resources freed up by amending Scheme settings redirected to this
purpose.
Response: Agreed in principle
The Government acknowledges that early engagement on proposed foreign arrangements and
fostering a broad understanding within the regulated community of risk to foreign policy and
national interest supports overall compliance with the Scheme. The Government will consider
how best to achieve this objective, including by exploring opportunities to build on existing
processes and enhance the support provided to the regulated community.
Recommendation 6
Focus the administration of the Scheme on high-risk arrangements, informed by foreign
policy and intelligence assessments, be proactive in engaging with entities on the nature of
risk and emerging trends, and build a risk-focused approach into administrative processes.
Response: Agreed
The Government recognises that further focusing the administration of the Scheme on high-
risk arrangements will make it stronger and more effective where it is needed most. In
implementing this recommendation, the Government will have regard to recommendations 4,
7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 16, 17, 18 and 20 of the report that will assist in focussing on high-risk
arrangements and improved stakeholder engagement.
3
Recommendation 7
(a) Increase education and outreach to Commonwealth Government entities on the
requirements of the Foreign Relations Act and the importance of those entities meeting the
intent of the Act in their own arrangements.
(b) Place a formal requirement on Commonwealth Government accountable authorities to
ensure that arrangements with foreign entities are consistent with Australia’s foreign
policy and do not adversely affect Australia’s foreign relations (for example, through the
Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 or other means).
Response: Agreed in principle
(a) The Government will consider ways to further extend its regular outreach to
Australian Government bodies to ensure awareness of the Scheme, its objectives and
the foreign policy and national interest considerations applied to arrangements that
fall within it.
(b) The Government will consider the most appropriate means for strengthening the
consideration by Australian Government accountable authorities of foreign policy
and national interest considerations when entering into foreign arrangements.
Recommendation 8
(a) Exempt arrangements with Five Eyes countries and articulation agreements between
educational institutions from the requirement to be notified under the Rules as these
arrangements represent low or no foreign policy risk.
(b) Exempt core and non-core arrangements relating to the sharing of information and
resources concerning the management of an emergency in Australia or overseas.
(c) Retain sister school and sister city arrangements as notifiable under the Scheme but
deem as non-core for the purpose of the Foreign Relations Act, with a focus on better
understanding the nature and risk of these arrangements with a view to exempting all or
part in the future.
(d) Increase education and outreach to local government on their obligations under the
Scheme, with a focus on improving notification of sister city arrangements.
Response: Agreed
(a) The Government recognises the efficiencies and reduced regulatory burden from
exempting arrangements with Five Eyes countries would make the Scheme stronger
and more effective by targeting efforts to arrangements that require more scrutiny.
This would be balanced against the benefits of visibility of arrangements with Five
Eyes countries, by exempting them from the notification requirements while keeping
them within scope of the Scheme. The Government similarly supports the exemption
of articulation agreements from the Scheme’s notification requirements. This will
require amendments to the Foreign Relations (State and Territory Arrangements)
Rules 2020 (the Rules).
4
(b) The Scheme already exempts core foreign arrangements that solely deal with the
sharing of information or resources for the management of a declared emergency in
Australia. The Government acknowledges the benefits of extending this exemption to
both core and non-core arrangements dealing solely with the sharing of information
and resources for the management of an emergency overseas. This will require
amendments to the Rules.
(c) The Government agrees to retain sister school and sister city arrangements as
notifiable under the Scheme and to clarify their status as non-core arrangements. This
will require amendments to the Act. Relevant Australian Government agencies will
work together to increase the Government’s and the regulated community’s
understanding of the nature and risks of sister school and sister city arrangements.
Exempting all or part of these arrangements in the future may be considered as part of
the next review of the Act.
(d) The Government agrees with the recommendation and will explore opportunities to
further enhance outreach at the local government level.
Recommendation 9
Identify and remove areas of inconsistency in how the Scheme defines core and non-core
entities in named low risk areas. Certain cultural institutions (museums and art galleries),
research institutions and TAFEs could be deemed as non-core on a case-by-case basis,
consistent with the treatment of the majority of those entities across states and territories.
Response: Agreed
The Government is committed to ensuring the Scheme is appropriately targeted to risk and
does not impose undue regulatory burden on State and Territory Entities (STEs), and will
remove any inconsistency in how the Scheme defines core and non-core entities. This will
require amendments to the Act and the Rules.
Recommendation 10
Remove the notification provisions for subsidiary arrangements from the provisions of the
Rules and include a provision in the Foreign Relations Act or Rules authorising the
Minister to request information about subsidiary arrangements entered into or proposed to
be entered into under the auspices of a foreign arrangement.
Response: Agreed
The Government agrees that removing the notification provisions for subsidiary arrangements
(while keeping them in scope of the Scheme) is appropriate given they generally carry low
foreign policy risk. Introducing a power for the Minister to request information in relation to
subsidiary arrangements will ensure the Government maintains visibility of subsidiary
arrangements where required. This will require amendments to the Act.
5
Recommendation 11
Streamline the administration of multi-party arrangements under the Scheme through use
of delegations and Ministerial discretion (related Recommendation 13), and update
guidance to encourage designation of a lead entity for the purpose of the Foreign
Relations Act.
Response: Agreed
The Government agrees that the changes proposed in recommendation 13 would ensure more
effective administration of multi-party arrangements under the Scheme. The Government will
also develop updated guidance on entering and notification of multi-party arrangements.
Recommendation 12
(a) Refresh key concepts in the Foreign Relations Act and Rules (State/Territory entity,
foreign entity, institutional autonomy, minor administrative and logistical) as part of a
process of maturing concepts based on operations to date.
(b) Provide more specific guidance and case studies on specific concepts through Scheme
guidance material, developed in consultation with STEs.
Response: Agreed
(a) Clarifying key definitions and concepts will bring greater certainty to the operation of
the Act, reduce the administrative burden for stakeholders and reduce inadvertent
non-compliance. This will require amendments to the Act, Rules and guidance
material available on the Scheme.
(b) The Government recognises that education is central to promoting compliance with
the Scheme. The Government will work with the regulated community, including
through the user group referred to in recommendation 20, to update the guidance
material available on the Scheme.
Recommendation 13
Take measures to improve the administrative efficiency of the Foreign Relations Act by
enabling delegations and ministerial discretion in certain circumstances:
i. delegation by the Minister of the power to approve negotiation of core
arrangements in certain circumstances
ii. flexibility to address administrative oversights or errors in relation to the
automatic cancellation of core foreign arrangements
iii. require only notification for renewals or variations of previously approved
core foreign arrangements, and
iv. provide the Minister with a power to extend a decision for complex matters
by up to a further 14 days.
6
Response: Agreed in principle
i. The Government agrees with the recommendation noting appropriate delegation of
the power to approve negotiation of core arrangements will streamline the
administrative operation of the Scheme. This will require amendments to the Act.
ii. Greater flexibility to address the automatic cancellation of foreign arrangements
arising from inconsequential or inadvertent non-compliance with the Act will better
safeguard Australia’s foreign relations. This will require amendments to the Act.
iii. Allowing renewals and variations to be managed through a ‘notification only’
approach would help streamline the administrative operation of the Scheme, enabling
a greater focus on higher-risk arrangements. This will require amendments to the Act.
iv. The Government agrees with the recommendation noting a power to extend the
decision timeframe for core arrangements would enable more effective whole-of-
government consideration and risk management of complex issues. This will require
amendments to the Act.
Recommendation 14
Retain a statutory requirement for a regular review of the Foreign Relations Act as set out
at section 63A, with a review to occur at least every five years and with terms of reference
addressing the key themes of this Review.
Response: Agreed in principle
The Government agrees that regular review of the Act is consistent with best practice and
will ensure the Act remains effective and fit-for-purpose. This will require amendments to
the Act.
Recommendation 15
Reduce the cost of administration of the Scheme through removal of low-risk
arrangements, legislative amendments that improve the efficient operation of the Foreign
Relations Act and updated guidance material.
Response: Agreed in principle
The Government is committed to ensuring the Scheme is administered efficiently and
appropriately targeted to risk. In implementing the recommendation, the Government will
also have regard to recommendations 4, 8, 9, 10 and 12, among others.
7
Recommendation 16
Require only one notification step for non-core arrangements, with an STE required to
notify the Minister within fourteen days of a non-core arrangement being entered.
Response: Agreed
The Government recognises that streamlining the notification requirements for non-core
foreign arrangements will strengthen the effectiveness of the Scheme by easing the
administrative burden on the regulated community and streamlining the administrative
operation of the Scheme. This will require amendments to the Act.
Recommendation 17
Provide on the Portal, a list of foreign universities that have been deemed not to have
institutional autonomy under the Scheme and the countries in which those institutions
operate, that can be referenced by entities in considering whether a foreign university is in
scope of the Scheme.
Response: Agreed
A list of foreign universities that are deemed not to have institutional autonomy, accessible
by STEs, will ease the administrative burden on the regulated community and enhance
compliance with the Scheme. In implementing the recommendation, the Government will
have regard to the refresh of key concepts agreed in principle in recommendation 12.
Recommendation 18
Provide more detailed feedback in the Portal as to why an arrangement has been deemed
out of scope and consolidate the main reasons why this occurs to reduce the number of out
of scope arrangements.
Response: Agreed
The Government recognises there is scope to better inform the regulated community of the
reasons why certain foreign arrangements or entities are deemed out of scope of the Scheme.
The Government will consider the most appropriate means of providing this feedback to
stakeholders. Any changes to the Portal will be implemented through the Government’s
ongoing program of enhancements to the online Portal.
8
Recommendation 19
Enable an advanced search capability in the Portal to allow authorised users to interrogate
their data and generate reports to reduce their administrative overheads.
Response: Agreed in principle
The Government will continue to enhance functionality and user experience on the Portal,
which already enables registered users to interrogate data and create reports. The Government
will explore opportunities to better inform the regulated community of the existing
functionality, including through the formal user group referred to in recommendation 20.
Recommendation 20
Establish a formal user group to embed user feedback into the administration of the
Scheme, including guidance material and information technology enhancements, and
ongoing consideration of administrative overheads and how these can be reduced.
Response: Agreed
The Government will establish a formal user group to create opportunities for the regulated
community to input into the administration of the Scheme.
Recommendation 21
Continue to enhance the Portal, in consultation with the proposed user group
(Recommendation 20), to assist entities to comply with the Scheme, increase transparency
and reduce administration.
Response: Agreed
The Government will continue its ongoing program of enhancements to the online Portal that
aims to streamline user experience and maximise compliance with the Scheme.
9
Recommendation 22
Ensure the Public Register enables transparency as an authoritative source of current
arrangements by
i. updating the Register only when a non-core arrangement has been entered
(noting the interaction with recommendation 16).
ii. removing arrangements that have expired, been terminated or are no longer
in operation from the Register, either by establishing a separately held
archive of past arrangements or removing them entirely.
iii. adding a requirement in the Foreign Relations Act that STEs must notify
the Minister when a notified arrangement has expired, been terminated or is
no longer in operation and reflecting this on the Public Register.
Response: Agreed
i. This recommendation relates to recommendation 16 and will help ensure the
Public Register remains navigable and useful for users. This will require
amendments to the Act.
ii. Archiving or removing from the Public Register information about arrangements
that have expired, been terminated or are no longer in operation will support the
transparency objectives of the Scheme. This will require amendments to the Act.
iii. The Government considers a requirement on STEs to notify when an arrangement
has expired, been terminated, or is no longer in operation and reflecting this on the
Public Register will enhance the transparency objectives and administration of the
Scheme. This will require amendments to the Act.
Recommendation 23
Retain exemptions for entries on the Public Register and provide further guidance on
Public Register exclusion requests, including in relation to the aggregation of data on
the Register.
Response: Agreed
The Government will provide opportunities to ensure greater understanding among the
regulated community of the type of information eligible for exclusion from the Public
Register and the form in which requests should be submitted.
10
