Australian Government response to the
Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and
Trade report:
Supporting democracy in our region
September 2025
Introduction
The Australian Government thanks the Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Defence and Trade for its inquiry into supporting democracy in our region.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator the Hon Penny Wong, called on the Committee to
establish a parliamentary inquiry into supporting democracy in our region in November 2022.
The Committee delivered its report in November 2023, shortly after Minister Wong launched
the Government’s International Development Policy in August 2023.
The Committee’s eight recommendations align well with the Government priorities set out in
the International Development Policy and associated Performance and Delivery Framework,
with some minor differences in implementation approach.
Australia is proud of its democratic system of government. We have a vibrant civil society,
independent media, and robust institutions underpinned by the rule of law. Our independent
institutions support effective government and, in turn, reinforce public confidence in
government.
The Government recognises that our economy, our democratic institutions, and the
connections and knowledge of all Australians, are powerful national strengths that will help
shape our international development assistance in a way that benefits both our region and
Australians.
The objective of Australia’s development program is to advance an Indo-Pacific that is
peaceful, stable, and prosperous. We respect sovereignty and differing political and
governance systems. The Government reaffirms its support for our partners to build effective
and accountable states, and inclusive democratic processes through our development
program.
Direct support for, and engagement with, civil society organisations will also continue to be
an integral part of how Australia implements its development program, recognising that civic
space is shrinking in many parts of the world, and that the nature and value of civil society in
each country is distinct.
Effective states and their citizens benefit from transparent, accessible, and responsive
governance. The Government is working with partner governments in the region to
strengthen their public institutions, including as they mediate and manage disruptive
influences and respond to the challenge of climate change.
The Government provides the following responses to the eight recommendations set out in
the Committee’s report.
1
Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends the Australian Government appropriately fund the Australian
Electoral Commission to develop long-term partnerships, appropriate resourcing and
preparedness with countries in our region who request assistance with elections. This
would involve a minimum commitment of three years, prior to the election, to enable
Australia to work in partnership with the local workforce to assist with systematic and
logistical challenges unique to each country.
Electoral assistance should support the planning, implementation, lessons- learned, and
change management phases of the electoral cycle, noting that elections require significant
planning and engagement before, during, and after polling day.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
The Australian Electoral Commission (AEC)’s best practice operations and long-standing
relationships in the Indo-Pacific region position Australia as a trusted partner of choice for
electoral assistance. In 2023-24, in collaboration with the Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade (DFAT), the AEC is providing support to fellow electoral management bodies in
Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Fiji, Republic of Marshall Islands, Tonga and
Kiribati. This is in addition to its leadership role in the region as secretariat to the Pacific
Islands, Australia and New Zealand Electoral Administrators Network.
The Government agrees that a ‘whole of electoral cycle’ approach strengthens the
sustainability and effectiveness of Australia’s electoral assistance. Such an approach allows
the AEC to develop programs targeting long-term issues, both with new partners and in
countries where it has existing relationships. Under the International Development Policy,
DFAT is working with whole-of-government partners, including the AEC, to prepare
country and regional Development Partnership Plans (DPPs) by 2024. DPPs will set out
shared priorities for Australian development assistance over the coming five years. This
includes electoral assistance where appropriate, and as agreed with partner governments
and informed by consultations with local, national, regional, and international partners.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government develop a public policy on
Australia’s long-standing precedent of providing election support for countries in the Indo-
Pacific region, when invited to assist. This policy would outline partner countries with
bilateral agreements which Australia assists with the running of independent and fair
elections in our region.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
Section 7(1)(fa) of the Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918 directs the AEC to provide
international assistance in matters relating to elections and referendums. The Government’s
International Development Policy sets out its policy commitment to supporting effective
and accountable states through Australia’s development program. This includes providing
election support, where agreed as a priority across Australian government agencies and
2
with local, national, regional, and international partners through country and regional
Development Partnership Plans. To strengthen coordination and implementation of
Australia’s election support across Government, DFAT will work with the AEC to:
- strengthen inter-departmental coordination on elections in the Indo-Pacific to
support the effectiveness of Australia’s electoral assistance efforts, policy advice,
and to anticipate emerging issues and ad-hoc requests
- revise the DFAT Elections Handbook, an internal guidance note, which sets out
principles for DFAT (and relevant Australian government agencies) in developing
policy approaches and/or delivering assistance relating to electoral processes
- disseminate the updated Elections Handbook across relevant Australian government
agencies, including integrating content into the International Development Faculty
curriculum in DFAT’s Diplomatic Academy
- update information available online through their respective websites to outline
Australia’s existing work on supporting elections.
The AEC publishes information about its international engagement annually in its
Corporate Plan and Annual Report 2022-23, available on the AEC website.
Recommendation 3
Given Pacific nations have identified ongoing challenges of climate change the Committee
recommends the Australian Government increase support for international communities in
our region. This support may include adaptation and mitigation works to prepare for
rising sea levels and extreme weather events given the adverse effect climate change has
on institutions, national security, and civil society which negatively impacts democracy.
Response:
The Government accepts and is implementing this recommendation.
The Government recognises that climate change is the single greatest threat to the
livelihoods, security and wellbeing of the peoples of the Pacific and an urgent global
challenge.
The Government’s climate engagement aims to strengthen Pacific resilience, reinforce
sovereignty and help sustain the Pacific’s tradition of global leadership on climate change.
The Government has committed, as part of the International Development Policy, to ensure
that 50 per cent of all new bilateral and regional investments valued at more than $3 million
will have a climate outcome by 2024-25, increasing to 80 per cent by 2028. The
Government has also increased Official Development Assistance to the region by
$900 million over four years, including at least $250 million in new funding for climate
change adaptation and resilience in the Pacific. Examples of these programs include the
Pacific-led Weather Ready Pacific initiative to enhance crucial early warning systems, and
the Pacific Resilience Facility, a Pacific-owned and led initiative for climate finance.
The Government has also joined with partners as part of the Pacific Islands Forum to
respond to the challenges of sea-level rise. In 2021, Forum Leaders issued the ‘Declaration
on Preserving Maritime Zones in the Face of Climate Change-Related Sea-Level-Rise’, to
ensure that maritime zones, once established in accordance with the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, continue to apply without reduction, notwithstanding
3
climate change-related sea-level rise. In 2023, Forum Leaders issued the ‘Declaration on
the Continuity of Statehood and the Protection of Persons in the Face of Climate Change-
related Sea-Level Rise’ to declare that the statehood and sovereignty of Forum Members
will continue, and the rights and duties inherent thereto will be maintained, notwithstanding
climate change-related sea-level rise. The Declaration also expresses a commitment by
Forum Members to protect persons affected by climate change-related sea-level rise.
Forum Leaders also endorsed the Pacific Regional Framework on Climate Mobility, a high-
level guide for Pacific governments in addressing the complex and wide-ranging issue of
climate mobility.
The Government is committed to strengthening partnerships that will facilitate building a
stronger, more resilient, and more peaceful Pacific. The Australia-Tuvalu Falepili Union
Treaty entered into force on 28 August 2024, representing a momentous step in the elevated
partnership between our two countries. The Falepili Union puts in place transformational
arrangements to safeguard the future of Tuvalu against impacts of climate change and
geostrategic challenges. Through the Falepili Union, Australia commits to establish a
special visa arrangement to allow Tuvaluans to come to Australia to live, work and study,
and we are upgrading our security partnership and enhancing our bilateral development
partnership, including climate adaptation support for Tuvalu.
Initiatives such as the Pacific Island Forum declarations and frameworks, and bilateral
agreements like the Falepili Union Treaty, can help the region navigate shared climate
change challenges, address climate change as an emerging security risk, and in so doing,
support democracy in the region.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends the Minister for International Development and the Pacific
report back to Parliament annually on Australia’s engagement and delivery of services to
Pacific countries regarding its development initiatives to combat, mitigate and adapt to
climate change.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
The Government submits that existing processes for briefing Parliament are sufficient, such
as the Annual Climate Change Statement to Parliament, the publicly available Performance
of Australian Development Cooperation Report, Senate Estimates Committee hearings,
Question Time, and Budget processes.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends the Australian Government establish a comprehensive media
broadcasting capacity and support program for the Indo-Pacific region that should
include:
• a charter and accountability framework that guarantees support is provided for media
skills and capacity building to enable independent reporting and analysis
4
• a flexible, independently administered fund to provide support for stronger partnerships,
internships and work experience for local journalist and independent media in the Indo-
Pacific region
• comprehensive training and development opportunities for journalists in the Indo-Pacific
region
• support for Australian journalists to work in the Indo-Pacific region and for journalists
from the Indo-Pacific to work in Australia and have the opportunity to report on and tell
their own stories.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
The Government launched its Indo-Pacific Broadcasting Strategy (IPBS), Australia-Pacific
Media and Broadcasting Partnership, Australia-Southeast Asia Media and Broadcasting
Initiative, and Australia-South Asia Media and Broadcasting Initiative on 13 July 2024.
Under the IPBS, the Government provided $40.5 million over five years from 2022-23 to
the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC) to support the creation and distribution of
compelling content for Indo-Pacific audiences, expand Radio Australia’s Pacific footprint,
and strengthen regional media capacity. This includes a new online learning platform to
deliver ABC training tailored for Indo-Pacific use, media support programs in Timor-Leste
and Indonesia, and a network of ABC local Pacific reporters to tell stories for and about the
region.
The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) is developing an Indo-Pacific Media
Fund to supplement existing efforts and flexibly respond to needs in the Pacific, Southeast
Asia and South Asia. New investments underway include funding for Australian
Associated Press to provide targeted training and access content in the Pacific, ABC
International Development to support women sports journalists in India, and the Bhutan
Centre for Media and Democracy to build media literacy and encourage civic engagement.
The Government also extended the PacificAus TV initiative, committing $28.4 million over
five years from 2022-23 to continue and expand provision of Australian television programs
to broadcast partners in the region.
These investments build on Australia’s history of supporting Indo-Pacific media, including
the longstanding Pacific Media Assistance Scheme and Media Development initiative,
foster stronger media partnerships, and offer opportunities for skills exchange and
development.
The Government will continue to review its investments and work with partners, including
other donors and the broader media sector, to amplify efforts to support Indo-Pacific
media. All support is subject to existing government accountability and reporting
processes. The ABC has operational and editorial independence from the Government and
consults on IPBS activities under a Memorandum of Understanding with DFAT and the
Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications and the
Arts. The availability of future government funding will be subject to Budget processes.
5
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends the Australian Government reinstate funding for a Women in
Parliament program within the Australian Parliament. This program should provide
support for building and strengthening partnerships in the Indo-Pacific region. The
program would focus on supporting leadership skills for girls and women and should
include:
• promoting women and girls’ voices in all levels of society such as schools, community
organisations, public and private sphere at provincial and national levels
• building connections with feminist civil society groups already in the region
• ensuring women and girls’ have improved access to quality health care services,
including reproductive health
• improving women and girls’ safety, especially for protecting women and girls from
gender violence and ensuring services are readily available
• promoting gender mainstreaming within all aspects of society in the Indo-Pacific
including intergovernmental policies that are agreed to and delivered.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
Gender equality is a key priority for the Australian Government’s international
engagement. Australia’s International Development Policy commits to supporting all
people to reach their full potential and notes that women, in all their diversity, are
under‑represented in positions of leadership and decision‑making.
Australia supports a wide range of programs that help build leadership skills for girls and
women. The Australia Awards Women Leading Influencing program supports women who
are scholarship recipients from the Pacific to deepen their leadership skills, networks and
capabilities for change at all levels of society - local, national, regional and international.
Australia also supports work by partners such as the Pacific Community (SPC), Pacific
Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS), Women’s Fund Asia, Urgent Action Fund – Asia &
Pacific, Women’s Fund Fiji, the Pacific Feminist Fund, Balance of Power and World
YWCA to promote women and girls’ voice and leadership and support civil society
networks.
Australia recognises that the realisation of universal sexual and reproductive health and
rights (SRHR) and safety from all forms of gender-based violence (GBV) are critical to
ensuring women and girls’ participation and leadership in all levels of society. DFAT is
supporting SRHR through the Transformative Agenda for Women Youth and Adolescents
in the Pacific, including by funding the UNFPA Supplies Partnership, as well as through
renewed and increased core funding to the International Planned Parenthood Federation.
Australia also funds programs to support essential GBV response services for survivors,
GBV prevalence studies and data development, GBV prevention initiatives and assistance
to local women’s organisations. This includes the UN Women Trust Fund to End Violence
against Women, support to the Pacific Partnership to End Violence Against Women and
Girls and the Fiji Women’s Crisis Centre.
Australia’s development assistance implements a twin-track approach to advancing gender
equality. This supports both targeted programming to promote gender equality, and the
mainstreaming of gender equality outcomes in development and humanitarian assistance.
6
To support mainstreaming, the International Development Performance and Delivery
Framework requires that all DFAT investments valued at $3 million and above must
include a gender equality objective.
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommends the Australian Government establish a central Civil Society
Organisation (CSO) Hub within the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade to support
the coordination of CSO development delivery in the region.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
The Government agrees with the Committee’s finding that civil society organisations
(CSOs) have an important role to play in supporting a thriving democracy and recognises
the valuable contribution that CSOs make to delivering the development program,
alongside the private and public sectors. The Government has committed $35m over four
years to establish a new civil society partnerships fund to address the challenges of
shrinking civic space in many parts of the world.
This investment will also support the establishment of a new platform to be a focal point
for Australia’s international civil society engagement. This new platform will bring
together Australian expertise and ideas, providing direct support to local civil society
actors, as well as feeding knowledge and insights back into the Department. It will be
additional to but integrated with other centralised civil society focussed programs such as
the Australian NGO Cooperation Program ($143m per annum).
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends the Australian Government set an annual base- line funding
target for the delivery of humanitarian and development programs, through Civil Society
Organisations, in the Official Development Assistance budget.
Response:
The Government does not accept this recommendation.
The Government recognises the value of NGOs and CSOs in achieving objectives under
Australia’s International Development Policy. Country and regional DPPs will reflect
respectful listening to local partners and set out shared development objectives over five
years. DPPs will also outline approaches to ongoing dialogue, evaluation, and learning.
This partnership approach requires flexibility to select the most appropriate implementing
partner for the circumstance, context, and goal, while working with a range of local,
bilateral and multilateral partners, and incorporating approaches to locally led
development.
The International Development Performance and Delivery Framework identifies
performance indicators to monitor Australia’s engagement with CSOs and NGOs. In
particular, Tier 3 indicators monitor the involvement of local actors, including CSOs, in the
design, delivery and evaluation of Australia’s development assistance. This includes their
involvement in the delivery of humanitarian assistance through partnerships with
Australian NGOs and the Australian Red Cross. Tier 2 indicators track the number of
7
CSOs (international, regional, national and/or local) that Australia supports to strengthen
accountability and/or inclusion. The policy also commits DFAT to establish a new
development program transparency portal to provide access to financial and performance
data on all DFAT-managed Official Development Assistance investments.
8
