ate
(»

Australian Government

Australian Government response to the
Standing Committee on Health, Aged Care and Sport report:

The New Frontier — Delivering better health for all
Australians

Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia

November 2023

[Page intentionally left blank]

Introduction

The Australian Government thanks the House of Representatives Standing Committee
on Health, Aged Care and Sport for its Inquiry into, and Report on, approval processes
for new drugs and novel medical technologies in Australia.

The whole-of-government response to the Committee’s recommendations has been
coordinated by the Department of Health and Aged Care on behalf of the following
Commonwealth agencies: ©

e Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care (ACSQHC)
e Australian Digital Health Agency

e Department of Industry, Science and Resources

e National Blood Authority (NBA)

e The Treasury.

Information in this document is current as at October 2023.

Information on approval processes for new drugs and novel
medical technologies in Australia

Therapeutic goods, including medicines and medical devices, are regulated by the
Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), which is part of the Department of Health and
Aged Care. The TGA is responsible for ensuring that therapeutic goods available for
supply in Australia are safe and fit for their intended purpose. Therapeutic goods must
generally be entered on the Australian Register of Therapeutic Goods (ARTG) prior to
import, export, supply or advertising, unless an exemption applies.

The Australian Government assists Australians in accessing necessary health services
and technologies by subsidising the cost of health-related goods and services. A range
of different funding arrangements, including public subsidy, are used through the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS), the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS), the
National Health Reform Agreements (NHRA) with states and territories for public
hospital treatments and through private health insurance benefits for medical devices,
such as cardiac pacemakers and defibrillators, regulated under the Schedule of the
Private Health Insurance (Medical Devices and Human Tissue Products) Rules, also
known as the Prescribed List of Medical Devices and Human Tissues Products (the
Prescribed List; formerly known as the Prostheses List).

The Department of Health and Aged Care is responsible for Health Technology
Assessment (HTA) of health services and technologies to provide policy-makers,
funders, health professionals and health consumers with the necessary information to
understand the benefits and comparative value of health technologies and procedures.
This information is used to inform policy, funding and clinical decisions, and assist with
consumer decision-making. HTA involves a range of processes and mechanisms that
use scientific evidence to assess the quality, safety, efficacy, effectiveness and cost
effectiveness of health services and technologies.

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia

The HTA process plays a vital role in ensuring the Australian Government's objective of
delivering a safe, effective and efficient health care system.

Therapeutic Goods regulation

The TGA is responsible for evaluating, assessing and monitoring products that are
defined as therapeutic goods. Therapeutic goods generally fall under three main
categories:

e Medicines - including prescription, over-the-counter and complementary
medicines, such as paracetamol and echinacea

e Biologicals - something made from or containing human cells or tissues, such as
human stem cells or skin

e Medical devices — including instruments, implants and appliances, such as
pacemakers and sterile bandages, software devices (including those with
artificial intelligence (Al)), personalised patient matched devices and in vitro
diagnostic tests.

The TGA also regulates ‘other Therapeutic Goods’, which include items such as
tampons and disinfectants.

Therapeutic goods are broadly defined in subsection 3(1) of the Therapeutic Goods Act
1989' (Therapeutic Goods Act) as goods that are represented in any way to be, or that
are likely to be taken to be, for therapeutic use, or for use as an ingredient or component
in the manufacture of therapeutic goods. ‘Therapeutic use’ principally relates to use in
humans in connection with:

e preventing, diagnosing, curing or alleviating a disease, ailment, defect or injury
e influencing, inhibiting or modifying a physiological process

e testing the susceptibility of persons to a disease or ailment

e influencing, controlling or preventing conception

e testing for pregnancy, or

e the replacement or modification of parts of the anatomy.

The definition of therapeutic goods also includes biologicals and medical devices (as
defined in the Therapeutic Goods Act).

Australia has a two-tiered system for the regulation of medicines, including
complementary medicines. Higher risk medicines must be registered on the ARTG,
which involves individually evaluating the quality, safety and effectiveness of the product.
Registered medicines are assessed by the TGA for quality, safety and efficacy. All
prescription medicines, most over-the-counter medicines and some complementary
medicines are registered. Lower risk medicines containing pre-approved, low-risk
ingredients and that make limited claims can be listed on the ARTG on the basis of the
applicant making certain certifications about the goods as part of their application.

1 www.legislation.gov.au/Latest/C2021C00376

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 2

The TGA undertakes around 150 significant prescription medicine or biological
assessments per year (new prescription medicine or major variation to an existing
medicine, e.g. extensions of indication and new routes of administration), with a median
assessment timeframe of 190 days over the past four years. Around 20 percent of these
assessments were considered in reduced timeframes (priority or comparable overseas
reports), and around 15 percent were granted orphan drug designations.

Health Technology Assessment

The Department of Health and Aged Care’s Technology Assessment and Access
Division is responsible for two program areas that are directly relevant to the Report’s
recommendations on HTA of medicines: the PBS and the Life Saving Drugs Program
(LSDP).

Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme

The PBS provides Australians with reliable, timely and affordable access to a wide range
of medicines. At October 2023, there were 910 different medicines listed on the PBS. In
2022-23, the total PBS expense for the supply of medicines was $17 billion.

The PBS supports Australia’s National Medicines Policy? objectives, including ensuring
equitable, timely, safe and affordable access to a high-quality and reliable supply of
medicines. Medicines are assessed by the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee
(PBAC), an independent, expert statutory body established under the National Health
Act 1953? (National Health Act) to make recommendations and give advice to the
Minister about which drugs and medicinal preparations should be subsidised through the
PBS, and which vaccines should be listed on the National Immunisation Program (NIP)
schedule.

The PBAC considers the effectiveness and cost of a proposed medicine compared to
alternative therapies. The PBAC recommends maximum quantities and repeats, and
may also specify that a medicine should only be subsidised in certain circumstances.

PBS program requirements, including the functions and role of the PBAC, are prescribed
in the National Health Act.

Provisions of the National Health Act and government policies and processes for the
PBS are supported by Strategic Agreements with Medicines Australia and the Generic
and Biosimilar Medicines Association (GBMA), agreed on 6 September 2021.4 The
agreements include commitments to a range of reforms and reform processes to secure
and maintain the best possible access for Australians. This includes reforms to ensure
that assessment processes for new drugs and novel medical technologies remain fit for
purpose, acknowledging challenges identified through this inquiry such as the rapid pace
of innovation, and the increasingly diverse therapies being brought to market, including

? www.health.gov.au/resources/publications/national-medicines-policy

3 www.legislation.gov.au/Latest/C2023C00143
4 www.pbs.gov.au/info/general/medicines-industry-strategic-agreement

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 3

precision medicines and combination therapies. The Strategic Agreement with
Medicines Australia commits the Commonwealth to:

e seeking early advice from the PBAC as to whether the base case discount rate
outlined in section 3A.1 of the PBAC guidelines aligns with international best
practice

¢ supporting and resourcing an HTA Policy and Methods Review that will involve
expert examination of several of the challenges identified through this inquiry,
including funding pathways for therapies for rare diseases and new and emerging
technologies (including cell and gene therapies, and other precision based
medicines)

e continuation of improvements to HTA processes co-designed with the medicines
industry and assessment of their effectiveness

e participating in a Medicines Australia convened Horizon Scanning forum to
identify major therapeutic advances which may enter the regulatory or
reimbursement systems (or both) over the following 18 to 24 months

e implementing a new and enhanced early consumer engagement process to
capture consumer and patient voices at an early stage of the HTA process

e working with the medicines industry on options for conditional funding
arrangements to complement the priority and provisional pathways used by the
TGA.

The Strategic Agreements between the Australian Government and Medicines Australia
and the GBMA will be in place for five years from 1 July 2022 to 30 June 2027.

The Australian Government has committed to the implementation of the Strategic
Agreements in full.

Life Saving Drugs Program

The LSDP is separate to the PBS and provides approximately 400 patients fully
subsidised access to expensive and !ife-saving medicines for rare and life-threatening
medical conditions. Medicines are eligible for the LSDP if they treat life-threatening and
ultra-rare conditions (defined as one case per 50,000 people or fewer in the Australian
population), and PBAC has found that they are clinically effective, but not cest effective
enough to list on the PBS. As at October 2023, there were 18 medicines on the LSDP
for the treatment of 11 conditions.

The LSDP Expert Panel assesses applications to include new medicines on the LSDP
and provides assistance and advice to the Chief Medical Officer (CMO). The CMO
advises the Minister for Health and Aged Care on medicines suitable for listing.

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 4

Medical technologies regulation

Many medical technologies are regulated for safety, quality and performance as medical
devices. Some technologies fall outside the scope of the therapeutic goods framework,
such as household and some personal aids for people with disabilities.

Medical devices generally have a physical or mechanical effect on the body or are used
to measure or monitor functions of the body, have therapeutic benefits and are used for
humans. This also includes in vitro diagnostic medical devices (IVDs).

There has been an increase in applications received by the TGA for inclusion of medical
devices on the ARTG, with an 11 percent increase from 2015-16 to 2020-21. The TGA
received 6,713 applications for inclusion of medical devices on the ARTG in 2020-21.

Applications to include a medical device on the ARTG usually rely on evidence of
conformity from a comparable overseas regulator. However, the TGA also undertakes
conformity assessment certification, which is the detailed evaluation of the
manufacturer's quality management system and for high-risk devices also a design
examination. Any manufacturer wishing to supply in Australia can seek TGA conformity
assessment Certification.

Medical and Diagnostic Services and Devices Health Technology Assessment

Public funding of medical and diagnostic services (with or without a device) is
considered by the Medical Services Advisory Committee (MSAC), an independent,
expert non-statutory committee.

MSAC appraises new medical services proposed for public funding, and provides advice
to Government on whether a new medical service should be publicly funded on an
assessment of its comparative safety, clinical effectiveness, cost effectiveness, and total
cost, using the best available evidence. Amendments and reviews of existing services
funded on the MBS or other programs (for example, blood products and blood-related
products) are also considered by MSAC.

Sponsors or suppliers of medical devices can also apply for listing on the Prescribed List
(formerly the Prostheses List), which sets out the prostheses for which private health
insurers must pay benefits (if the patient is covered) and the benefit amount. Prostheses
include surgically implantable prostheses and other eligible medical devices, and human
tissue items.

The 2020-21 Federal Budget included $22 million over four years to improve the
Prescribed List and its arrangements.*®

Gene Technology Scheme

Some emerging medical technologies involve the administration of genetically modified
organisms (GMOs) into patients. GMOs may also be used to synthesise new medicines

5 www.health.gov.au/health-topics/private-health-insurance/the-prostheses-list/prostheses-list-reforms-
and-reviews

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 5

or as a diagnostic tool. In Australia, activities with live and viable GMOs are regulated
under the National Gene Technology Regulatory Scheme, which is comprised of the
Gene Technology Act 2000° (Gene Technology Act), Gene Technology Regulations
2001 and corresponding state and territory legislation. The object of the Gene
Technology Act is to protect the health and safety of people, and to protect the
environment, by identifying risks posed by, or as a result of, gene technology, and by
managing those risks through regulating ‘dealings’ (activities) with GMOs.

The Gene Technology Regulator is a statutory office holder who is supported in the
performance of their functions by Department of Health and Aged Care staff within the
Office of the Gene Technology Regulator (OGTR). Dealings with GMO therapeutics that
are regulated under the Gene Technology Act include:

e developing the GMO
e manufacture of the GMO

e use of the GMO in the course of the manufacture of a thing that is not the GMO
(e.g. making insulin with a GMO)

¢ conducting experiments with the GMO (e.g. administering a GMO into a human
in a Clinical trial)

e import, transportation and disposal of the GMO
e the possession, supply, or use of the GMO in the course of these dealings.

The OGTR also monitors post-market activities with GMO therapeutics. Authorisations
for commercial supply of GMOs include ongoing reporting and documentation
requirements for licence holders.

While the TGA and the OGTR both regulate the manufacture of a GMO therapeutic, the
TGA focuses on making sure the manufactured GMO complies with quality standards
and assesses the efficacy and clinical safety of the GMP. In contrast, the OGTR is
concerned about the containment of the GMO within a manufacturing facility, to avoid
the release of the GMO into the environment, as well as the safety of workers in the
facility.

5 www.legislation.gov.au/Latest/C2016C00792

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 6

Australian Government
response to recommendations

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia

Recommendation 1

The Committee recommends the Australian Government establish a Centre for
Precision Medicine and Rare Diseases within the Department of Health.

e The objective of the Centre should be to ensure that the capacity of the
Department of Health is enhanced to provide Australians with timely access to
new drugs and novel medical technologies, including for rare diseases, and
that the HTA process and government research agenda aligns with this
outcome.

e The Centre should provide advice to the Department of Health and the
Australian Medical Research Advisory Board on research priorities.

e The Centre should provide education and training information including
support for patients and a comprehensive horizon scanning unit for new
medicines and novel medical technologies.

e The Centre should provide advice to governments on the establishment of a
dedicated regulatory Health Technology Assessment pathway for cell and
gene technologies, in consultation with state and territory governments,
industry, patients and other relevant stakeholders. The Centre should regularly
provide advice to government on the effectiveness of those pathways and
areas for further reform.

The Australian Government accepts this recommendation in principle and agrees that
the Department of Health and Aged Care needs to maintain the capacity to provide
Australians with timely access to new drugs and novel medical technologies, including
treatments for rare diseases, and cell and gene technologies.

The establishment of a dedicated Centre for Precision Medicine and Rare Diseases
requires detailed scoping. The Australian Government accepts the intent of the
recommendation, but further consideration needs to be given to the organisational
structure to deliver the intent of the Centre.

The Australian Government is already delivering activities that support the intent of the
recommendation. The Australian Government is committed to funding quality health and
medical research and acknowledges the critical role research plays in contributing to a
world-class health system. As part of this commitment, the Medical Research Future
Fund (MRFF) provides grants of financial assistance to support health and medical
research and improve health outcomes, quality of life and health system sustainability.

Under the 2"! MRFF 10 Year Plan’ announced in the 2022-23 Budget, $750 million is
committed over 10 years under the Clinical Trials Activity Initiative, which provides
funding through three streams:

7 www.health.gov.au/resources/publications/mrff-2nd-10-year-investment-plan

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 8

e Rare Cancers, Rare Diseases and Unmet Need (RCRDUN)
e International Clinical Trials Collaborations
e Effective Health Interventions.

The MRFF RCRDUN grant opportunities support clinical trials research that investigates
new drugs, devices or treatments for rare cancers/diseases or for areas of unmet
medical need.

The MRFF Genomics Health Futures Mission® is a landmark investment that will bring a
new generation of precision medicine to Australia. The Mission will invest $500 million
over 10 years from 2018-19 to 2027-28 in genomics research. It will improve testing and
diagnosis for many diseases, help personalise treatment options to better target and
improve health outcomes, and reduce unnecessary interventions and health costs.

In addition to the MRFF, the Australian Government is currently exploring opportunities
to achieve better research and public health outcomes using data from the My Health
Record System. The 2021-22 Federal Budget announcement to enhance the My Health
Record system included $9.9 million to implement a research and public health use of
My Health Record Data Proof of Concept project over two financial years (2021-22 and
2022-23). The Proof of Concept project aims to establish and test the critical technical
infrastructure as well as the end-to-end governance processes and protocols to enable
the efficient, secure and ethical sharing or release of My Health Record data for
research and public health purposes.

In future, it may be possible to link diverse data sets through national digital health
infrastructure, such as My Health Record, to support longitudinal research. For rare
diseases, health outcomes can be improved through the ability to look at genomic data
alongside medicine and disease data.

Further, a structured approach has been established to enable research opportunities
identified within HTA to be developed into competitive grant opportunities funded by the
MRFF. $100 million is available over ten years (2022-23 to 2031-32) for this research.
The HTA Chairs Committee, including Chairs from MSAC and PBAC, works with the
Health and Medical Research Office in the Department of Health and Aged Care to
provide advice on the identification, discussion, prioritisation, and refinement of grant
opportunities under the MRFF HTA funding stream; supports the monitoring of MRFF
grants with relevance to the HTA; and other work as required. This is set out in the
MRFF Terms of Reference for the HTA Chairs Committee.®

The HTA Consumer Consultative Committee provides strategic advice and support to
the principal HTA Committees and the Department of Health and Aged Care. The
Committee work plan has included activities specifically relating to consumer

® www.health.gov.au/initiatives-and-programs/genomics-health-futures-mission
° www. health.gov.au/resources/publications/mrff-health-technology-assessment-hta-chairs-committee-
terms-of-reference

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 9

engagement and participation in HTA processes. This has included workshops on HTA
processes and consumer evidence generation.

The Australian Government has also agreed that Medicines Australia will hold an annual
horizon scanning forum with participants in the innovator medicines sector to identify
major therapeutic advances which may enter the regulatory or reimbursement systems
(or both) over the following 18 to 24 months, and which may represent a significant
disruption in the treatment paradigm and/or require innovation in health care system
planning. This will allow the Commonwealth to understand potential implications from the
introduction of new medical advances in terms of resources, systems and processes,
and to inform early engagement of consumers and patients in HTA processes. The first
forum was held in December 2022 in Canberra.

In addition, the National Strategic Action Plan for Rare Diseases’’ (Rare Diseases
Action Plan) provides guidance and direction around key goals and priorities for
Australians living with a rare disease and their families and carers. The Rare Diseases
Action Plan highlights three Pillars:

e Awareness and Education
e Care and Support
e Research and Data.

A range of key priorities and areas for action are identified under these three Pillars,
including:

« prevention

e early detection and screening

e accurate and timely diagnosis

e access to appropriate care

e supporting people living with a rare disease beyond the health domain
e development of, and access to, relevant therapies

e research and innovation.

Funding of $3.3 million over three years from 2020-21 has been provided for rare
disease awareness and education activities; development and delivery of education
resources for health professionals; and activities to support people living with a rare
disease.

Continued Government focus on precision medicines and rare diseases would align with
early findings from consultations undertaken by the Australian Digital Health Agency on
behalf of all Australian Governments to refresh the National Digital Health Strategy
(NDHS).'t The NDHS engagements indicate support for federated data sets for

10 www.health.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/2020/03/national-strategic-action-plan-for-rare-

diseases. pdf
1 www.digitalhealth.gov.au/about-us/national-digital-health-strategy-and-framework-for-action

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 10

treatment and early detection research, overlayed with Al and machine learning to
support clinical decision making at the point of care.

In addition, the Australian Government will invest $28.1 million in the period through to
2026 to consider and establish a new national government body to guide the future of
genomic health and medicine over the coming decade. This will include consultation and
engagement with consumers, researchers, health professionals and industry to
determine the core functions and remit of the body. States and territories will also be
invited to partner with the Australian Government on this initiative to ensure a nationally
cohesive approach to embedding genomics within the healthcare system.

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 11

Recommendation 2

The Committee recommends that, consistent with Recommendation 1 and the
establishment of a Centre for Precision Medicine and Rare Diseases, the Health
Technology Assessment (HTA) process for cell and gene therapies be simplified
to establish a clear and certain pathway for such therapies.

e This simplified process should be considered together with a new HTA
pathway for cell and gene therapy.

e Building on the Medical Research Future Fund Genomics Health Futures
Mission, the Australian Government and state and territory governments
should establish a jointly funded national genomics testing program to provide
equitable access to genomic testing nationwide. As part of the program,
governments should ensure the provision of genomics counselling for all
patients.

e The Australian Government should prioritise and simplify the regulation of cell
and gene therapy pathways for clinical trials in Australia.

The Australian Government accepts this recommendation in part.
HTA process for cell and gene therapies

A process for the assessment of cell and gene therapies already exists through the
current HTA committees arrangements. The commitment to the HTA Policy and
Methods Review (HTA Review) in the Strategic Agreement’? with Medicines Australia
includes a commitment to reviewing methods for evaluating new and emerging
technologies (including cell and gene therapies, and other precision based medicines)
and the suitability of existing funding pathways as required. This is reflected in the terms
of reference for the HTA Review, which includes in its scope HTA policy, methods,
assessment and funding pathways for Highly Specialised Therapies.

The 2020-2025 Addendum to the NHRA* sets out a national approach to the HTA of
high cost, highly specialised therapies proposed to be delivered through public hospitals.
If an application for public funding is determined to be for a potential Highly Specialised
Therapy, MSAC undertakes an HTA on behalf of both the Commonwealth and state and
territory governments. Where this occurs, state and territory health representatives are
involved across all stages of the process. Once a high cost, highly specialised therapy is
recommended for delivery in the public hospital system, the Australian Government
makes a 50 percent contribution through the NHRA to the states and territories towards
the efficient cost of providing the service. Further, the Australian Government's funding
for the first two years of delivery of a new high cost, highly specialised therapy is exempt
from the 6.5 percent national growth cap contained in the NHRA.

? www.pbs.gov.au/info/general/medicines-industry-strategic-agreement

13 www.health.gov.au/initiatives-and-programs/2020-25-national-health-reform-agreement-nhra

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 12

Genomic testing

In Australia, the joint funding of public hospital services by the Commonwealth and the
state and territory governments is governed by the NHRA. Genomic testing is already an
in-scope public hospital service provided under the NHRA, and every person with a
Medicare card is eligible under the NHRA to receive clinically appropriate public hospital
care free of charge. It is unclear what benefit there would be in creating an additional
stand-alone program to deliver public services already covered by the NHRA, and this
would present a risk of creating further fragmentation in the provision of public health
services.

The Australian Government remains committed to supporting genomics testing,
including through its investment in the MRFF Genomics Health Futures Mission that will
bring a new generation of precision medicine to Australia. The Mission will invest

$500 million over 10 years from 2018-19 to 2027-28 in genomics research. It will
improve testing and diagnosis for many diseases, help personalise treatment options to
better target and improve health outcomes, and reduce unnecessary interventions and
health costs.

Cell and gene therapy pathways for clinical trials

In mid-2021, the TGA commissioned a review of Australia’s regulatory framework for
gene, cell and tissues therapies to provide suggested improvements including for clinical
trial pathways. This review and TGA’s response have now been published."

While the Clinical Trial Notification scheme is widely acknowledged as a fast and
straightforward access pathway, the TGA will improve and provide transparency of
timeframes for Clinical Trial Approval scheme applications and provide more accessible
communication materials on regulation of clinical trials and an advice service to assist
research and clinical organisations to support these reforms.

A single point of entry for all approvals/notifications required to conduct clinical trials in
Australia will also be implemented, with work already underway.

4 www.tga.gov.au/report-cell-gene-and-tissue-regulatory-framework-australia-stakeholder-perspectives-
tga-response

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 13


Recommendation 3

The Committee recommends the Australian Government establish an Office of
Clinical Evaluation within the Department of Health to assess the best and most
effective care for patients in the context of new and emerging health technologies.

° The Office should enable evaluation of both pharmacological and non-
pharmacological interventions, combination products and products with
different sponsors. It should also establish a “living evidence” function to
ensure Health Technology Assessment is based on the most up-to-date global
health practices.

e The Office, in consultation with relevant stakeholders, should conduct a review
of how the Department's Health Technology Assessment system assesses
combination products, particularly combinations with different sponsors, with
a focus on:

o Value attribution between the different products

o Challenges to cooperation between sponsors due to competition law

o Disincentives for a sponsor with an already listed product to participate
in its combination listing

e The Office should consider collaboration with the National Institute for Health
and Care Excellence (NICE) in the United Kingdom to establish similar clinical
evaluation processes in Australia that links in with Australian Health
Technology Assessment processes.

e The Office should cooperate and share information with the state and territory
governments to ensure that patients receive treatment where it is safest and
most efficacious for them and that there are no gaps in continuity of care.

The Australian Government accepts this recommendation in principle, and agrees that
clinical evaluation within the Department of Health and Aged Care must continue to
support patient access to new and emerging health technologies.

The Terms of Reference for the HTA Review" state that one of the objectives of the
HTA Review is to present a comprehensive set of recommendations for reforms to
Government that ensure HTA policy and methods are weil adapted to, and capable of,
assessing new technologies that are emerging or are expected to emerge in the coming
years.

The HTA Review will consider HTA policy and methods for managing clinical, economic,
financial and other uncertainty throughout the lifecycle of a technology including better
capture of necessary data on duration of effectiveness and safety events. To support
this work, expert groups have been engaged to undertake an analysis of approaches
used in clinical evaluation and managing uncertainty internationally. This analysis will

15 www.health.gov.au/resources/publications/health-technology-assessment-policy-and-methods-review-
terms-of-reference

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 14

include the approaches used by the United Kingdom’s National Institute for Health and
Care Excellence (NICE) and several other comparable countries.

The terms of reference for the HTA Review also state that it will consider HTA policy and
methods for all medicines and vaccines and other health technologies that improve
health outcomes associated with medicines and vaccines. This will include consideration
of combination products and any barriers to equitable and the earliest possible access.
The Australian Government expects that the Reference Committee will consider the
input and recommendations arising from this inquiry where appropriate.

The Minister for Health and Aged Care has approved for the Department of Health and
Aged Care, together with the PBAC and MSAC, to enter into a collaboration
arrangement with five like-minded HTA agencies in the United Kingdom and Canada.
Additional Canadian and New Zealand HTA agencies joined the collaboration in
September 2023."® NICE is a key participant in this collaboration arrangement. The
arrangement creates opportunities to explore collaboration and support for shared
strategic objectives and priority areas. The collaboration arrangement respects each
participant’s governance arrangements and independence and does not impose legally
binding commitments.

The Department of Health and Aged Care also has a Memorandum of Understanding
with Singapore to enhance collaboration between our two countries on HTA.

The Department of Health and Aged Care also collaborates with state and territory
governments through the HTA of high cost Highly Specialised Therapies. The 2020-25
Addendum to NHRA sets out a national approach to the HTA of therapies proposed to
be delivered through public hospitals. The MSAC appraises Highly Specialised
Therapies on behalf of both the Commonwealth and state and territory governments.
Where this occurs, all information is shared with state and territory health
representatives, and jurisdictions are included across all stages of the process.

The Commonwealth, states and territories will also continue to advance broader HTA
reform under the NHRA, which contains commitments to support nationally cohesive
HTA reform. The goal of nationally cohesive HTA reform is to increase the consistency,
timeliness, efficiency and value of HTA processes in Australia. Intended outcomes of this
reform include effective sharing of information and recommendations between
jurisdictions and the Commonwealth, including consistent outputs and standardised
advice, improved patient access to cost effective health technologies, and coordinated
and timely responses to rapidly changing technologies.

16 www.pbs.gov.au/info/news/2023/09/international-hta-collaboration-expands

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 15

Recommendation 4

The Committee recommends that the assessment process for the Life Saving
Drugs Program (LSDP) be streamlined and delays in access to treatments be
reduced by ensuring that a sponsor only need lodge one application for one
Health Technology Assessment pathway. The Committee recommends either:

e Providing sponsors with an immediate pathway to the LSDP Expert Panel
(instead of waiting for a PBAC determination), or

e Providing a pathway by adjusting the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme section
100 program, with specific criteria, as with other section 100 programs.

The Committee believes it is critical that consideration be given to how the LSDP
will integrate with an increasing number of precision medicine applications into
the future.

The Australian Government accepts this recommendation in principle, in part, and is
committed to providing more timely access to new medicines for life-threatening and
ultra-rare conditions. The commitment to the HTA Review in the Strategic Agreement
with Medicines Australia includes a commitment to the review addressing methods for
evaluating medicines for rare diseases for PBS reimbursement and alternative funding
pathways. This is included in the terms of reference for the HTA Review.

Sponsors may already apply for PBS listing for medicines for ultra-rare diseases through
a single application to the PBAC. However, where sponsors wish to seek listing on the
LSDP because they do not agree to provide the medicine at a comparatively cost
effective price (as required under legislation for listing on the PBS), then a further
application to the LSDP Expert Panel is required.

As a statutory body, the PBAC can only perform functions set out in its enabling
legislation, the National Health Act. Amending the National Health Act to give the PBAC
the function of advising Government on LSDP listings is one potential pathway to
address this recommendation. Adjusting PBS section 100 listing requirements may also
require legislative amendment. Policy and legislative options will be explored as to how
this recommendation can be implemented, while ensuring the long-term sustainability of
the PBS.

The alternative recommendation to set up a medicine listing pathway that bypasses the
PBAC is not accepted. The Australian Government affirms that the PBAC remains the
pre-eminent source of advice to Government on the clinical effectiveness and cost
effectiveness of new medicines.

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 16

Recommendation 5

The Committee recommends that the Australian Government develop a labour
market and skills strategy to expand the number of health economists in
Australia. This could include encouraging training within Australia as well as
seeking expertise from overseas.

The Australian Government accepts this recommendation, recognising the need to
expand the number of health economists within Australia to fully support the Department
of Health and Aged Care’s HTA functions.

A labour market and skills strategy will allow the Australian Government to rigorously
assess the strengths and weaknesses of the domestic market for health economists,
based on a strong evidence base. A formal strategy will help Government make more
informed policy decisions to improve the labour market for health economists. It will also
help bring greater consistency and coordination to the issue.

The Australian Government will explore a range of options to achieve this outcome.

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 17

Recommendation 6

The Committee recommends that the Department of Health increase its efforts to
educate and engage with patients, clinicians, industry and the public and develop
education campaigns on all aspects of the regulation and reimbursement system.

The Committee recommends that the Department of Health improve information
available on the websites of the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) and its
Health Technology Assessment (HTA) bodies for all users including patients,
clinicians, industry and the public. This would include:

e Using plain English language, infographics and videos to explain general
processes and timelines

e Explanations on the TGA and all HTA websites of how that entity fits into the
overall regulation and reimbursement system, similar to the Medical Services
Advisory Committee’s Australian Government HTA Processes factsheet.

e The Department of Health expanding the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
Medicines Status website to include technologies funded through the Medicare
Benefits Schedule or create an equivalent website for such technologies.

The Australian Government accepts this recommendation.
Public education on regulation and reimbursement

The Australian Government accepts this part of the recommendation. The Department of
Health and Aged Care currently conducts a range of educational and engagement
activities with stakeholders and regular meetings with industry on aspects of the
Australian regulation and reimbursement system. This includes presenting at medical
and consumer conferences and providing webinars and workshops as well as written
material. These activities have increased over the last two years, due to increasing
online delivery capability built during the pandemic, and will continue to be developed
and expanded, leveraging off updated information for the Australian HTA webpages.

Further, several fora are used to facilitate consultation with the medicines industry, with
the primary forum being the Access to Medicines Working Group (AMWG). The AMWG
is a collaborative committee comprising representatives of the Department of Health and
Aged Care, and Medicines Australia. The Minister for Health and Aged Care has
oversight of the AMWG and its policy priorities. The AMWG also has a range of
subgroups, each of which focuses on a range of specific issues, including cost recovery
arrangements and the transparency and efficiency of listing processes.

In addition, the TGA is continually striving to improve its communication and education of
all aspects of therapeutic goods regulation for a diverse range of audiences including
patients, clinicians, industry and the public. The TGA is informed by its Consumer
Engagement Strategy that sets out principles designed to positively influence consumer
health by:

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 18

e providing quality and tailored information through various channels

e driving service improvement through feedback from the end users of health
products

e designing solutions that meet consumers’ needs and empowers them to have
informed decisions with health professionals.

As part of the Budget 2023-24, the TGA will receive funding for four years for activities
aimed at protecting public health ($61 million over four years), which includes (but is not
limited to) increased engagement and information to consumers and health
professionals and providing continued assistance and education to smail and medium
enterprises particularly those developing emerging technologies

Website improvements

The Australian Government accepts this part of the recommendation and work is already
underway to update website content and structure. Content on the Australian HTA
webpages is currently undergoing a significant review, with improvements implemented
progressively during 2022. The websites now include new content that better describes
HTA processes in more accessible language. Improvements are continuing and may
include infographics and resources aimed to assist stakeholders in understanding the
regulation and reimbursement system.

Likewise, the TGA is developing information and education resources that use plain
English and engaging formats (such as infographics and videos) delivered through
channels that are accessed by the target audiences to maximise the opportunity for
consumer awareness. It is important to note, however, that TGA’s industry cost recovery
model currently limits a very significant extension of consumer outreach activities.

As part of the Digital Transformation Strategy announced in December 2019, the
complete redevelopment of the TGA website is underway following extensive feedback
from consumers, health professionals and industry. The TGA website redevelopment
includes a content audit and rewrite of content in plain English, improved information
architecture to assist in finding information, support to improve user experience when
making regulatory submissions, and work on digital self-service options.

Expansion of Medicines Status Website
The Australian Government accepts this aspect of the recommendation.

The Medicine Status Website’” was developed to enable consumers to search for and
monitor the status of medicines as they progress through the PBS listing process.

For services being considered by the MSAC, webpages are already available for each
technology outlining the progress of the application through the MSAC process and
stakeholders are able to search using keywords for applications.*® Over the last

17 www.pbs.gov.au/medicinestatus/home.html
18 Accessible from www.msac.gov.au/internet/msac/publishing.nsf/Content/application-page

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 19

12 months, improvements have been made, and continue to be made, to the MSAC
webpages. The Department of Health and Aged Care is considering how best to capture
timeframes information, including whether such information would best be displayed on
the MSAC webpages, included as part of the Health Products Portal, or provided on a
separate resource similar to the Medicines Status Website.

Building the capacity of consumers

The Strategic Agreement with Medicines Australia includes a commitment to implement
an enhanced consumer engagement process to capture consumer and patient voices in
respect of applications to list new medicines on the PBS. Through this work, the
Department of Health and Aged Care will continue to engage with consumers to
understand what information is needed to ensure the patient voice is heard.

The HTA Consumer Consultative Committee was established in 2017, and the
Consumer Evidence and Engagement Unit (CEEU) was established in 2019 to support
broader consumer participation strategies across HTA. The CEEU has hosted a range of
workshops and meetings with consumer organisations aimed at better supporting
consumer representatives to engage effectively with HTA processes, including
Consumer Symposiums aimed at improving engagement and communication with
patients and consumer groups on HTA-related matters. Similar activities are planned
across 2023 and will include strategies looking at how best to build the confidence and
capacity of consumers and consumer organisations to contribute effectively to HTA
processes.

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 20

Recommendation 7

The Committee recommends that the Department of Health and the National Blood
Authority, in consultation with state and territory governments, reform the Health
Technology Assessment processes for blood products to provide better
alignment with the Health Technology Assessment system, including:

e Publication of guidance documents for applicants

e Establishment of timelines for applications, and publication of an assessment
cycle calendar

e Creation of a parallel Therapeutic Goods Administration and Health
Technology Assessment process.

The Australian Government accepts this recommendation, noting there are unique
features of fresh blood and other blood products that will need to be factored into any
review of current assessment processes. For example, in addition to considering the
level and type of evidence that is appropriate for rare disease therapies, treatments
funded under the national blood supply require the consideration of Commonwealth,
state and territory governments due to the joint funding arrangements. Further review of
current HTA processes for blood products, including the development of guidance and
potential assessment timeframes, will also need to be considered by governments.

The NBA is preparing a guidance document so that applicants can more easily
understand the application process, which will be done in consultation with stakeholders.
It will also be informed by the submissions to this inquiry, the requirements of the
National Blood Agreement, and the practical operation of assessment processes.

The Department of Health and Aged Care, including the TGA, and NBA are already
working collaboratively to investigate efficiencies that might be gained through the
creation of further parallel HTA procedures. This would build on existing informal
interactions and information sharing between the Department of Health and Aged Care,
TGA and the NBA to support HTA processes.

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 21

Recommendation 8

The Committee recommends that the Australian Government make the following
changes to submission fees for the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) and
the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC) and where appropriate
Medical Services Advisory Committee (MSAC) assessments in the following
separate circumstances:

e Replace the current orphan drug fee waivers with a HECS-style fee waiver, in
which orphan drug application fees are payable on successful application,
only once the drug has earned the sponsor a certain amount of revenue. The
Department of Health should determine this threshold value in consultation
with industry.

e To support smaller companies, HECS-style fee waivers for any sponsor
company with revenue at or below $50 million per annum.

e HECS-style fee waivers for Australian start-up companies with a specified
amount of revenue in the Australian market to promote innovation.

The Committee also recommends introducing a sliding scale for fees for
resubmissions, with fees being lower for resubmissions.

The Australian Government notes this recommendation.

A Higher Education Contribution Scheme (HECS)-style fee waiver would involve
interest-free loans with repayment starting when taxable revenue reaches a certain
repayment threshold. Outstanding loan amounts would be indexed annually in line with
the Consumer Price Index to maintain real value of debt.

The Australian Government remains committed to ensuring safe and clinically effective
new medicines and health services are available to Australians who need them. The
Australian Government will continue to consider the potential for both fee arrangements
and waivers (including HECS-style waivers) that support smaller companies when
introducing cost recovery arrangements for HTA processes.

TGA submission fees

Implementation of the proposed HECS-style fee waiver mode! would require detailed
consideration by Government of how it could be funded, as submission assessment
costs for non-orphan drugs are currently fully cost recovered irrespective of the projected
revenue from sales of the product. Under the proposed model, for each orphan drug
considered, the TGA would incur the full TGA salary and other costs of each evaluation
up front, but depending on revenue from sales of the product would either recoup those
costs some years later, or not at all. Monitoring sales would also incur audit costs. Any
differential based on revenue of the sponsor company rather than the product itself not
being financially viable to market in Australia (which is currently part of the criteria for
orphan drug eligibility) may be seen to reflect the cost of investing in research and
development of orphan products and reduce overall incentives for development and
application.

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 22

The current orphan drug fee waiver mechanism aims to a strike a balance between
subsidising orphan drugs, while not providing incentive for submissions to be either
premature or of poorer quality.

PBAC and MSAC submission fees

The Department of Health and Aged Care conducted a public consultation process in
January 2022 regarding the development of a cost recovery proposal for MSAC
applications including the feasibility of a HECS-style fee waiver. Through this process,
stakeholders have identified a number of complex policy options which the Department
is working to explore in detail, and will consider incorporating into an amended proposal.

The development of a cost recovery proposal for MSAC applications was supported by a
Portfolio Charging Review undertaken by the Department of Health and Aged Care in
conjunction with the Department of Finance in 2022.

The Department of Health and Aged Care currently has a fee waiver mechanism in
place for PBAC submissions and is actively considering the inclusion of waiver and
exemption mechanisms in future MSAC charging models. This mechanism allows a
waiver to be granted if the PBAC submission is of high public interest and payment of
fees would make the submission financially unviable to the applicant. Exemptions to fees
are also available for a variety of reasons including due to public health events or
temporary supply issues.

Other issues

A move to introduce fee waivers for Australian startup companies would need to take
into account the views of Australia’s international trading partners. Few regulators have
differential fees for review of applications from local and international companies.

While the Australian Government notes the intent behind the fee sliding scale for
resubmissions, it is inconsistent with the requirements of the Australian Government
Charging Framework.'® This Framework requires Departments of State to recover the
efficient cost of activities generated by stakeholders.

1° www.finance.gov.au/government/managing-commonwealth-resources/implementing-charging-
framework-rmg-302/australian-government-charging-policy#australian-government-charging-framework

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 23

Recommendation 9

The Committee recommends that the Australian Government establish a fund to
support patients, clinicians and non-profit organisations to sponsor registration
and reimbursement applications where there is no realistic prospect of a company
serving as sponsor, and where the Department of Health is otherwise supportive
of the application.

e Such a fund should be targeted at treatments for conditions where low patient
numbers in Australia serve as a market barrier and where there is a clinical
demand and need. The fund should be available for applications to repurpose
previously listed medicines and technologies.

e The fund should be annually capped with clear and transparent eligibility rules.

The Australian Government notes this recommendation.

The Department of Health and Aged Care currently has several mechanisms in place to
financially support applicants seeking registration of health technologies via the TGA,
subsidy through the PBS, NIP or the LSDP, or public funding through the MBS or other
Commonwealth funding programs.

There is currently no legal or procedural barrier to non-profit organisations serving as a
sponsor. However, there may be practical barriers to non-profit organisations acting as
sponsors for products such as repurposed medicines. Any sponsor needs to be able to
undertake full product stewardship roles throughout the product life cycle, including
safety monitoring and reporting (pharmacovigilance) and ensuring manufacturing quality,
which remain essential for public safety reasons.

Medical conditions where there are low patient numbers (less than 5 in 10,000 people)
are considered to be rare diseases. The Department of Health and Aged Care is
currently working to address rare diseases at a national level via the Rare Diseases
Action Plan.”° There are also several programs and initiatives that support the treatment
and management of rare diseases including the TGA’s orphan drug program and PBAC
cost recovery policy.

The TGA’s orphan drug program waives application fees for applications seeking public
funding for new medicines to treat rare diseases with low patient numbers and where
payment of fees would make the medicine financially unviable to market in Australia.
The program also includes a pathway to seek orphan designation for new dosage form
medicines. This pathway is intended to provide support to register medicines on the
ARTG that would not be financially viable in the absence of a TGA fee waiver.

For applications seeking PBS or NIP listing, there are two mechanisms in place to
financially support applicants. Applicants have the option to apply for fee exemptions or
fee waivers for submissions that meet certain criteria. Fee exemptions are applicable for
submissions in relation to TGA designated orphan drugs for treatment of rare diseases

20 www.health.gov.au/resources/publications/national-strategic-action-plan-for-rare-diseases

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 24

with low patient numbers. Fee waivers are applicable for submissions that invoive the
public interest and for which payment of fees would make the submission financially
unviable.

As at October 2023, the LSDP includes 18 life-saving, high cost medicines that are not
listed on the PBS for 11 ultra-rare conditions, providing physical and financial relief for
approximately 400 eligible patients annually. There is currently no additional cost to
sponsors in bringing forward applications to the LSDP. There is also no cost to eligible
patients in accessing these very high cost medicines and no cap on funding available for
the program.

For applications to MSAC seeking public funding for new medical services to be listed on
the MBS or other Commonwealth programs, applications can be (and are) made to the
Department of Health and Aged Care by the medical profession, medical industry and
others, including clinicians and non-profit organisations with an interest in seeking
Australian Government funding for a new medical service, health technology or change
to an existing service. The applicant has the option to request a Department-funded
HTA, including for applications related to medical services and health technologies for
treatment of conditions with low patient numbers. A Department-funded HTA includes a
Population, Intervention, Comparator and Outcome (PICO) assessment and also a
Departmental! Contracted Assessment Report. For future MSAC charging models the
Department of Health and Aged Care is actively considering the inclusion of waiver and
exemption mechanisms.

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 25

Recommendation 10

The Committee recommends that the Australian Government amend the National
Health Act 1953 (Cth) to give the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee the
power to authorise Managed Access Programs. The eligibility criteria for these
Managed Accessed Programs should be aligned as far as possible with the
eligibility criteria for the Therapeutic Goods Administration’s provisional
registration.

The Australian Government accepts this recommendation in principle, noting that
amendments to the National Health Act can only be made by the Australian Parliament.

The Managed Access Program is an existing mechanism that enables the listing of
medicines registered by the TGA on the PBS under special circumstances of high unmet
clinical need, on terms that allow for the resolution of otherwise unacceptable clinical or
economic uncertainty for the PBAC. The PBAC is able to recommend products for listing
under a Managed Access Program as outlined in the 2015 framework.”!

While these arrangements can lawfully be given effect under current legislation, options
to specifically legislate the arrangements will need to be considered by the Australian
Government.

Under the Strategic Agreement with Medicines Australia, the Commonwealth has
acknowledged the need to complement the priority and provisional medicines pathways
used by the TGA, and agreed to work with Medicines Australia to consider options for
conditional funding arrangements. Matters in respect of efficient and equitable funding
approaches and pathways for medicines wiil also be considered as part of the HTA
Review.

21 See www.pbs.gov.au/industry/listing/elements/pbac-meetings/pbac-outcomes/2015-03/Overview-of-
managed-access-program.pdf

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 26


Recommendation 11

The Committee recommends that the Department of Health conduct a
comprehensive consultation process with industry to establish a more flexible
way forward for the repurposing of drugs in Australia. This should include:

e Establishing a new pathway that incentivises the repurposing of drugs for all
diseases, not just rare disease.

The Australian Government accepts this recommendation.

The Australian Government through the Department of Health and Aged Care is
introducing a medicines repurposing program to improve patient access to treatments by
assisting sponsors to expand the approved uses of their medicines. The program was
announced as part of a broader PBS reforms package in the 2023-2024 Budget” and is
expected to open in early 2024.

The program will target medicines for which a significant public health benefit has been
identified but there is little or no commercial incentive for a sponsor to pursue regulatory
approval and PBS listing to make this use more accessible. The program will strengthen
the voice of clinician, academic and patient groups by encouraging their active
participation in identifying new usages of medicines.

The Department of Health and Aged Care commenced work on the medicines
repurposing program in early 2021 and has undertaken an extensive consultative
process with stakeholders in the form of workshops, roundtables, and public
consultations during 2021 and 2022.

The program will support and provide incentives for sponsors through the regulatory
processes for the TGA and reimbursement processes for the PBS with the aim of adding
repurposed medicine usages as cheaper alternatives for health professionals to
prescribe for consumers on the PBS.

Stakeholder feedback has been integral to the development of the program, and the
Department of Health and Aged Care will continue to seek feedback during 2023 to
support program rollout.

22 Budget 2023-24 — budget.gov.au/content/bp2/download/bp2_2023-24.pdf

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 27

Recommendation 12

The Committee recommends that the Therapeutic Goods Administration make the
following changes to its Orphan Drugs Program:

e Provide automatic access to the Priority Review Pathway for all medicines
granted an orphan drug designation

e Treat paediatric patient populations as separate to adult patient populations
for the purposes of the eligibility criteria

e Better account for the extra costs incurred by a sponsor in expanding its
medicine to paediatric indications, for the purposes of assessing commercial
viability as part of the eligibility criteria

e Where the prevalence of a disease is unknown in Australia, accept evidence of
prevalence in other comparable countries or, in diseases of extremely low
prevalence, worldwide for the purposes of the eligibility criteria.

The Australian Government accepts this recommendation in part.
Automatic Priority review of orphan drugs
The Australian Government does not accept this part of the recommendation.

Current arrangements allow assessment of medicines to be undertaken as a priority
where:

e the medicine is a new prescription medicine OR a new indications medicine; AND

e an indication of the medicine (the priority indication) is the treatment, prevention
or diagnosis of a life-threatening or seriously debilitating condition; AND

e either:
e no therapeutic goods that are intended to treat, prevent or diagnose the condition

are included in the ARTG (except in the part of the ARTG for goods known as
provisionally registered goods); OR

e if one or more therapeutic goods that are intended to treat, prevent or diagnose
the condition are included in the ARTG (except in the part of the ARTG for goods
known as provisionally registered goods) — there is substantial evidence
demonstrating that the medicine provides a significant improvement in the
efficacy or safety of the treatment, prevention or diagnosis of the condition
compared to those goods; AND

e there is substantial evidence demonstrating that the medicine provides a major
therapeutic advance.

There is a significant equity risk in expediting medicines for rare conditions but not those
that treat larger populations, especially in cases where the orphan drug may not
represent a significant therapeutic advance. As well as additional and unfunded impact
on the TGA’s resources, priority evaluations can place a significant burden on sponsors,
not all of whom are able to provide the rapid responses necessary to meet the required
timeframes.

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 28

Automatically assigning priority status to all orphan medicines will substantially increase
the number of priority medicines and cause additional unfunded costs to the TGA, and
further Australian Government consideration of funding options would be required.

Treat paediatric populations separately to adult populations
The Australian Government does not accept this part of the recommendation.

Paediatric patient populations are already considered separately to adult patient
populations when the disease process is considered to be different in the paediatric
population or is specific to the paediatric population.

\f paediatric populations were considered to be a separate population in all cases for the
purposes of orphan medicine designation, Australia’s approach would no longer align
with international approaches such as those used by the European Medicines Agency
and would hinder international collaboration. In addition, the basis of the orphan
designation is to provide an incentive for regulatory submissions if the entire treatment
population is small; separating out adult and paediatric populations (which when
considered together may form a substantial population) does not align with that logic.

Changing the criteria would result in an increase in applications. As orphan drug reviews
are not cost recovered, further consideration of funding options would also be required.

Expanding medicines to paediatric indications
The Australian Government accepts this part of the recommendation in principle.

To support availability of paediatric specific formulations (e.g. syrup), the orphan drugs
program already has a separate pathway for new dosage form medicines. This pathway
is intended to be an incentive to sponsors to register new dosage form medicines that
would not be financially viable in the absence of a TGA fee waiver. In this pathway, the
medical plausibility and prevalence criteria do not apply for orphan designation.
However, the existence of this pathway may need to be publicised more to sponsors.

Financial viability, along with other criteria, can also be considered within the general
orphan designation criteria for a medicine that is not a new dosage form.

Evidence of prevalence
The Australian Government accepts this part of the recommendation.

The TGA already accepts evidence to support prevalence based on epidemiological
data or databases available overseas supplemented with an explanation of the
extrapolation to the Australian population. This is currently included in the orphan drugs
program guidance.”

23 www.tga.gov.au/publication/orphan-drug-designation-eligibility-criteria

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 29

Recommendation 13

The Committee recommends that the Department of Health reform its regulatory
and reimbursement processes to enable therapeutic goods to be registered and
reimbursed by molecular indication in addition to by disease indication. This
should include legislative change if necessary.

The Australian Government accepts this recommendation.

The TGA processes for prescription medicine approval already allow for registration of a
medicine based on a molecular indication, i.e. they are ‘tissue agnostic’. Molecularly
defined indications for use of medicines are used to either further characterise a
histology-based condition, or where there is a molecularly-defined abnormality occurring
in more than one organ, permitting a histology-agnostic indication. For example,
larotrectinib (Vitrakvi®), which is mentioned in the Inquiry Report, is currently
provisionally registered in adults and paediatric patients with locally advanced or
metastatic solid tumours based on a molecular indication, i.e. neurotrophic tyrosine
receptor kinase gene fusion. Pembrolizumab (Keytruda®) also has two provisionally
registered indications that are tissue agnostic (unresectable or metastatic solid tumours
that are microsatellite instability-high or mismatch-repair deficient or mutational
burden-high solid tumours).

However, some medicines which may qualify for orphan designation based on a specific
disease may be less likely to meet orphan requirements with a molecular indication.

The process for subsidising medicines through the PBS allows for medicines to be
subsidised by molecular indication where this is supported by the evidence presented in
the submission. Larotrectinib, for example, is subsidised for children for the treatment of
solid tumours of any type who have the neutrophic tropomyosin receptor kinase gene
fusion.

The decision to recommend reimbursement of a medicine on the PBS for a
histology-specific or molecularly-based indication will depend on the codependency
claim for the molecular test and therapy, and also the clinical safety and effectiveness
data presented for assessment. When a predictive molecular test that defines the
codependency becomes universally utilised in patients with histological diagnoses, the
assessment of codependency for therapy may no longer be required, based on evidence
presented to support a reimbursement application.

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 30

Recommendation 14

The Committee recommends that the Australian Government reconsider the
current cost recovery funding model for the Therapeutic Goods Administration,
paying attention to future staffing and IT infrastructure needs in an environment
where demand on its services and systems are expected to increase in future
years. The Committee recommends funding specifically for:

e IT systems upgrades, to modernise and match the IT capability of other
overseas Tier 1 regulators.

e An expansion of its staffing capacity in areas of new medical and
technological advances including for horizon scanning.

e The release of TGA Australian Public Assessment Reports at the same time as
a prescription medicine is listed.

e The implementation of the HECS-style fee waivers outlined in
Recommendation 8.

The Australian Government accepts this recommendation.

In recent months, the Department of Health and Aged Care has undertaken work on the
TGA funding model, supported by external consultants. This includes an assessment of
the appropriate levels of cost recovery for services to industry as well as an identification
of public health/public good and other activities that may not be appropriate to cost
recover from industry.

The TGA’s public health/public good activities, which include both the specific elements _
identified in the recommendation as well several other areas, currently cost almost

$30 million per year. These activities include compliance, enforcement and litigation
costs (of which 90 percent of the effort is for products not approved by the TGA),
consumer and health professional education and communication activities, advisory
support for researchers and small businesses, as well as the list of activities proposed
by the Committee. The TGA currently receives a limited appropriation to support certain
activities such as the orphan drug program, the COVID-19 response and the Special
Access Scheme.

As part of the Budget 2023-24, TGA will receive funding for four years for activities
aimed at protecting public health ($61 million over four years) which includes, but is not
limited to, compliance and enforcement for products and companies outside the
regulatory system, increased engagement and communication with consumers and
healthcare professionals and continued assistance to smail and medium enterprises
particularly those developing emerging technologies.

‘The TGA is currently implementing a consolidated workflow management system, which
includes time tracking, to clearly determine the costs of chargeable and non-chargeable

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 31

activities in accordance with the Australian Government Charging Framework.”
Following completion of a multi-month time tracking exercise, the Australian Government
will consider any changes to current funding arrangements.

4 www.finance.gov.au/government/managing-commonwealth-resources/implementing-charging-
framework-rmg-302/australian-government-charging-policy#australian-government-charging-framework

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 32

Recommendation 15

The Committee recommends that the Australian Government ensure the
membership of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee and Medical
Services Advisory Committee provides the appropriate expertise for all
applications. This should include the possibilities of enhanced cross-membership
between the two committees and the appointment of temporary members to
consider individual applications.

e Recognising the nature of health challenges in Indigenous communities,
membership should include representation from Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Peoples.

The Australian Government accepts this recommendation in principle.

The Department of Health and Aged Care and the HTA Committee chairs remain
committed to accessing people with the skills to provide the best advice and facilitate
cross-member interaction and information sharing. It is not feasible for a standing
committee to hold expertise for every specialised application it receives, and the
committees are able to source external expertise to supplement the expertise of their
standing membership, including when dealing with very rare diseases or specialised
therapies.

Cross-membership of HTA Committees continues to be a feature of the existing
committee structure. There are also several committee members who are appointed to
more than one HTA Committee or sub-committee. Further, codependent applications are
considered jointly by members from the MSAC Evaluation Sub-committee (MSAC ESC)
and the PBAC Evaluation Sub-committee (PBAC ESC).

The Australian Government recognises the nature of health challenges in First Nations
communities and agrees with the objective that membership of MSAC and PBAC should
include representation from First Nations peoples. The MSAC includes a First Nations
member.

As part of this objective, the Department of Health and Aged Care will continue to
consult with First Nations organisations when seeking nominations for MSAC, PBAC and
their sub-committees.

Current committee members have extensive experience in work relevant to First Nations
communities, including experience with:

e the Council of the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC)

e the National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation

e the Poche Centre for Indigenous Health

e the Advisory Group of the University of New South Wales Research Centre for
Primary Health Care and Equity (for which Indigenous Health is one of the three
research streams)

e the Townsville Aboriginal and !slander Health Service

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 33

e the Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies research
ethics committee.

in 2020, all Australian governments signed the National Agreement on Closing the Gap,
negotiated in genuine partnership with First Nations representatives. The National
Agreement on Closing the Gap includes four Priority Reforms that commit all
Governments to changing the way they work with First Nations people.

The Department of Health and Aged Care has established a Closing the Gap Steering
Committee to drive its implementation of the Priority Reforms. The Closing the Gap
Steering Committee will undertake a review of the Terms of Reference of all
departmental committees to ensure they align with the Priority Reforms, which includes
a measure of the number of First Nations representatives on boards and committees.

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 34

Recommendation 16

The Committee recommends that the Department of Health investigate further
opportunities for the formation of an international Health Technology Assessment
consortium similar to the Access Consortium to streamline the regulatory process
for certain medicines and medical technologies. This investigation should include
discussions with representatives of the Health Technology Assessment bodies of
the United Kingdom, Canada and other countries with systems similar to
Australia’s.

e The Committee recommends that the Therapeutic Goods Administration work
with the United States Food and Drug Administration and other overseas
regulators to establish an equivalent of Project Orbis for non-cancer rare
diseases, or to expand Project Orbis to include such diseases.

The Australian Government accepts this recommendation.

Increased international collaboration has the potential to benefit Australians through the
ability to support reduced market authorisation timeframes, support the TGA to make
informed and internationally consistent decisions about therapeutic products, and reduce
regulatory duplication for industry. For regulatory review, there are major work sharing
programs involving the ACCESS Consortium,” bilateral collaboration with the European
Medicines Agency, and extensive acceptance of Comparable Overseas Regulator
Reports.

The TGA approached the United States Food and Drug Administration (US FDA) in
2019 to discuss the potential for expanding Project Orbis into areas other than oncology,
but at that time this was not supported by the US FDA. The TGA will continue to engage
with international regulatory partners and industry to seek opportunities for further
collaboration on shared evaluations, as there have been recent suggestions of interest in
collaboration on cell and tissue therapies.

In May 2021, the Department of Health and Aged Care signed a Memorandum of
Understanding with the Singapore Ministry of Health in the field of health cooperation,
which will facilitate deeper exchanges of information, knowledge and expertise in health
technology assessment.

Further, the Minister for Health and Aged Care has recently approved the Department of
Health and Aged Care, together with the PBAC and MSAC, to enter into a collaboration
arrangement with like-minded HTA agencies in the United Kingdom and Canada.
Additional Canadian and New Zealand HTA agencies joined the collaboration in
September 2023.” The collaboration arrangement will provide a framework for close
and collaborative ways of working to support strategic objectives, which includes
collaboration with these agencies to identify and progress opportunities to improve HTA
and regulatory collaboration.

25 www.tga.gov.au/australia-canada-singapore-switzerland-united-kingdom-access-consortium
26 www.pbs.gov.au/info/news/2023/09/international-hta-collaboration-expands

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 35

The Australian Government acknowledges the potential for streamlined assessment
processes for reimbursement decisions through work sharing with countries that have
similar systems to Australia. The terms of reference for the HTA Review include in its
scope consideration of the feasibility of international work sharing for evaluation of
technologies in scope for the HTA Review.

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia

36

Recommendation 17

The Committee recommends that the Australian Government establish a scheme
that supports the domestic medical technology sector, similar to the Food and
Drug Administration’s Breakthrough Devices Program in the United States.

The Australian Government accepts this recommendation in principle, noting that further
investigation is required (including broad stakeholder consultation and consideration of
funding options).

Existing TGA pathways for priority applications for new and novel devices could be
enhanced subject to availability of resources. These pathways currently focus on the late
development stage of medical devices (including medical devices already approved in
other regulatory jurisdictions), and offering shorter timeframes for regulatory evaluation
of medical devices.

Should an early development stage program for medical devices be established,
assessment by the TGA could focus on examining the ‘breakthrough’ aspect of the
technology, requiring the likelihood of major clinical advantage (i.e. based on pre-clinical
evidence or pilot stage single-arm clinical evidence).

A Review of the National Medicines Policy was undertaken during 2021 and 2022 in
recognition of the substantial changes to the health landscape since the original policy
was published in 2000.

Stakeholder feedback from the Review’s consultation processes called for a continued
focus on supporting thriving, dynamic medicines industry and research sectors with the
capability, capacity and expertise to respond to current and future health needs.

An updated National Medicines Policy was published in December 2022.7? Promoting
responsive, innovative and sustainable medicines industry and research sectors is one
of its central themes.

In addition, the Government’s $15 billion National Reconstruction Fund (NRF) will
facilitate increased flows of finance into priority areas of the Australian economy, through
targeted investments to diversify and transform Australian industry, create secure,
well-paying jobs, and boost sovereign capability.

The Government has earmarked $1.5 billion of NRF finance for the medical science
priority area. This will build Australian medical manufacturing including in medical
devices, medicines and vaccines. The NRF also includes $1 billion of finance earmarked
to grow Australia’s advanced manufacturing capability across the priority areas and
encourage the commercialisation of home-grown innovation and technology.

27 www.health.gov.au/resources/publications/national-medicines-policy

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 37

Recommendation 18

Recognising the vital role that vaccines play in addressing many diseases,
including its importance in providing protection against Covid-19, the Committee
recommends that the Department of Health conduct a review of the National
Immunisation Program. This review should focus on reforming existing
approaches used to value vaccines to ensure early and rapid deployment of
vaccines in Australia.

The Australian Government notes this recommendation.

The NIP is a collaborative initiative involving all levels of government, healthcare
providers, administrators and researchers. It provides free vaccines across 17 disease
groups to eligible people including infants, children, young adults, vulnerable adults and
older people who are at greater risk of serious harm from vaccine preventable diseases.
In order to list a vaccine on the NIP, under legislation it must be approved by the TGA
and considered and recommended by the PBAC.

As noted in response to Recommendation 3, the Strategic Agreement between the
Commonwealth and Medicines Australia includes a commitment to an HTA Review.
Australia’s health technologies policy includes the range of processes and mechanisms
that use scientific evidence to assess the quality, safety, efficacy, effectiveness and cost
effectiveness of health services in Australia, including vaccines. As part of the review
process, the Reference Committee for the HTA Review will consider a number of
matters, including the methods for evaluating vaccines for listing on the NIP and the
suitability of existing funding pathways as required.

The Australian Government agrees that vaccine assessment processes, including the
purchase of vaccines through NIP, should be fit for purpose for Australian health needs.
This includes accounting for the innovation involved in producing vaccines for specific or
novel strains of diseases where existing treatment options are limited, the level of
efficacy of vaccines in comparison with existing treatments, and reducing the time taken
for assessment of new vaccines.

The NIP is not intended to procure or deploy vaccines in a national health emergency
situation. During the COVID-19 pandemic, vaccine procurement was managed under
item 182 of Schedule 1AB of the Financial Framework (Supplementary Powers)
Regulations 1997.”° This item allows financial support for activities that strengthen the
nation’s capacity and capability to detect, prepare for and respond to health
emergencies and communicable diseases.

The Australian National Audit Office undertook a review to assess the effectiveness of
the planning and implementation of the COVID-19 vaccine rollout, which was tabled in
August 2022. The Department of Health and Aged Care welcomed the findings and

28 www. legislation.gzov.au/Latest/F2022C00438

Australian Government response: Inquiry into approval processes for new drugs and novel medical
technologies in Australia 38


[ocr truncated at 40 pages]