Australian Government response to the
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Health,
Aged Care and Sport report:
Walking the allergy tightrope – Addressing the rise of allergies
and anaphylaxis in Australia
APRIL 2023
Overview
In August 2019, the issue of allergies and anaphylaxis in Australia was referred to the House
of Representatives Standing Committee on Health, Aged Care and Sport (Committee) by the
previous Government.
Australia has one of the highest rates of allergies in the world, affecting millions of children
and adults. The Australian Government acknowledges there is currently no cure for allergies
and daily life can be stressful and challenging for people with allergies and their families
trying to avoid triggers and manage their symptoms. The Government therefore welcomes
the Committee’s report and its recommendations to improve diagnosis, treatment and
support for allergy sufferers in a nationally consistent manner.
The Government would like to thank all of those involved in the Inquiry, including people
with allergy and their families who outlined their personal experiences at the public
hearings.
The Committee’s report highlights issues with access to allergy specialists and treatments,
inadequate allergy education for health professionals, underreporting of anaphylaxis,
confusing food labelling, lack of drug allergy de-labelling programs, use of alternative and/or
unproven treatments, to name a few.
The Government recognises the importance of ensuring health professionals and education
providers have access to suitable allergies education and training, and for sufferers of
allergic disease to have access to appropriate support, diagnosis and treatment options. The
Government is committed to pursuing a nationally consistent approach to managing
allergies and anaphylaxis and will encourage jurisdictions to act on recommendations to
achieve this in the delivery of allergy services, education and training, and reporting.
The Australian Government Response supports (or supports in principle) 11 of the 24
recommendations. One response is noted, and the remaining 12 recommendations are
partially supported. The Government already has arrangements in place to address some of
the recommendations.
Some recommendations have financial implications which need to be considered in context
with the Government’s other competing budget priorities. Therefore, in principle support
does not represent a commitment to funding.
The Committee’s report highlights the roles of both the jurisdictions and the Australian
Government in addressing the issues of allergies and anaphylaxis in Australia. Some of the
recommendations do not fall within the remit of the Australian Government. In principle
support for these recommendations indicates agreement with the benefits of these
recommendations but recognises that the State and Territory governments are responsible
for their funding and implementation.
2
Recommendations 1 and 2
1: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with the states and
territories to establish a National Centre for Allergies and Anaphylaxis in Australia, to ensure
there is a national standardised approach to allergy management.
2: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government dedicate additional funding
into food allergies and anaphylaxis research, in particular funding for:
• the Centre for Food and Allergy Research (CFAR) so it can continue its work past 2022
(if Recommendation 1 has not been implemented by expanding CFAR to become a
National Centre for Allergies and Anaphylaxis);
• clinical research into food allergy treatments (including allergies outside of peanut
allergy) in particular into food based oral immunotherapy, including head-to-head
trials (trials with no placebo);
• research into emerging allergic diseases such as eosinophilic oesophagitis and food
protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES);
• research into the social and psychological effects of allergies and anaphylaxis; and
• establishing a national register for anaphylactic episodes and death.
Partially supported
The Government recognises the value of a consistent approach to allergy management in
Australia to ensure all Australians can access the best care available. The Government is
providing funding of $16.6 million from 2022-23 to 2025-26 to the Australasian Society of
Clinical Immunology and Allergy (ASCIA) and Allergy & Anaphylaxis Australia (A&AA) to
establish a National Allergy Council. This will ensure a nationally coordinated approach for
the implementation of the National Allergy Strategy. The National Allergy Council will focus
on:
• preventing allergic disease by expanding National Allergy Strategy programs,
developing new programs based on research findings, and scoping the requirements
for a national allergy reporting system;
• upskilling health professionals by expanding existing training resources and
developing new models of training delivery;
• scoping the minimum requirements for potential inclusion of allergy training in the
curriculum for health and education degrees;
• expanding existing, and developing new, online resources to support schools and
early childhood education and care (ECEC) to implement the minimum standards for
anaphylaxis prevention and management;
• providing support and advocacy for sufferers of allergic disease via A&AA;
• expanding and promoting food allergen management training in food service;
• expanding drug allergy education resources for health professionals, developing
consumer information and standardising terminology in My Health Record for
adverse drug reactions; and
3
• expanding the 250K youth project for young people with severe allergies.
The Government is also providing $10.2 million from 2022-23 to 2025-26 to the Murdoch
Children’s Research Institute to expand its Centre for Food and Allergy Research into a
National Allergy Centre of Excellence. This will support a national collaboration of
researchers and clinicians by centralising research on food, drug, vaccine, insect, and
respiratory allergies. The National Allergy Centre of Excellence will:
• oversee a Clinical Trials Network that supports large scale studies embedded in
routine clinical care, including for food allergy oral immunotherapy, penicillin de-
labelling, venom immunotherapy for insect anaphylaxis, and respiratory allergy;
• establish a National Allergy Repository to collect and analyse data and biospecimens
from Australian adults and children living with allergy across allergy domains;
• lead a series of living systematic reviews and stakeholder roundtables to synthesise
and translate evidence for drug, food, insect and respiratory allergic diseases; and
• support, train and mentor the next generation of allergy researchers through
competitive scholarships and fellowships in the field of allergy.
The National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC) is the government’s lead
agency for funding health and medical research. From 2012 to 2021, NHMRC has expended
funding of over $105 million for research related to allergies and anaphylaxis, with $40
million in funding provided for food allergy research. In addition to this,
$2.5 million was committed to the research grant ‘Towards eradicating food allergy: from
population to precision prevention, early intervention and management’ for the Murdoch
Children’s Research Institute in 2022. NHMRC continues to welcome food allergy and
anaphylaxis-related research grant applications from researchers through its standard
research-funding mechanisms.
To complement its standard schemes, NHMRC sets aside annually a small proportion of its
total expenditure budget to fund research through its Targeted Calls for Research (TCR)
program. A TCR is a specific funding mechanism that seeks to greatly advance research or
address a known gap in a particular area of health and medical science that will benefit the
health of all Australians. NHMRC will continue to consider and prioritise new TCR topic
proposals submitted by community and professional groups, as well as from states,
territories and the Australian Government, in accordance with established processes.
In September 2019, the previous Government sought agreement through the former
Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory Council to work towards ensuring a nationally-aligned
approach to notifications of anaphylactic episodes and death, and to engage with the
National Allergy Strategy on the development of a national scheme (e.g. a national register).
This was not agreed as it was a priority for all states and territories at the time or they
required more information about how it would operate before engaging. Funding will be
provided to the National Allergy Council to determine an appropriate anaphylaxis reporting
4
system and to scope its requirements, including determining legislative
requirements/restrictions across different jurisdictions.
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider providing a
healthcare card to people with severe and chronic allergic conditions and a carers allowance
for their carers where appropriate.
Partially supported
Provisions already exist that enable some children or adults with severe and chronic allergic
conditions to qualify for a Health Care Card (HCC) and/or Carer Allowance for their carers,
where appropriate. Access is targeted based on need through means testing and
qualification criteria that consider the severity of the condition and the level of care
required. Providing access to Carer Allowance and/or a HCC solely based on a person’s
medical condition would mean that some people would receive public support even though
they are financially able to meet their own costs and/or manage their own care needs.
HCCs are given to social security allowance payment recipients, or people who are on a low
income. They provide access to Commonwealth Government health concessions, including
a lower annual threshold to qualify for increased Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS)
benefits under the Extended Medicare Safety Net and cheaper co-payments for medicines
listed on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).
Carer Allowance is designed to assist carers who provide a certain level of daily care and
attention to a child or an adult who has a disability or medical condition. Qualification is
based on the level of personal care that it is considered, or established, the carer provides.
Carers who provide a qualifying level of care can qualify for Carer Allowance, regardless of
the disability or medical condition of the care receiver.
An adult with chronic allergic conditions or anaphylaxis would generally be able to monitor
and manage their environment to minimise any impact on their condition, and seek
assistance when necessary. These actions are unlikely to require the level of personal care
support that would qualify a carer for Carer Allowance.
Allergy sufferers with significant out-of-pocket costs may qualify for the MBS and PBS safety
nets. For MBS services, the most significant safety net is the Extended Medicare Safety Net.
Once an individual or family reach an annual threshold in out-of-hospital out-of-pocket
spending, they may qualify for the Extended Medicare Safety Net which provides an
increase in MBS benefits (generally up to 80% of out-of-pocket costs) for the remainder of
the calendar year. The annual threshold for concession card holders and families eligible for
Family Tax Benefit Part A is significantly lower than the annual threshold for all other
individuals and families eligible for Medicare. All out-of-hospital out-of-pocket costs (the
difference between the MBS out-of-hospital rebate and the practitioner’s fee) contribute
5
towards reaching the EMSN thresholds. The PBS safety net limits the total annual cost of
PBS medicines for families and individuals who require a large number of prescriptions.
When a patient reaches the safety net threshold within a calendar year, they qualify to
receive PBS items at a cheaper price or free of charge for the rest of that calendar year.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with all states and
territories to provide a consistent national framework for patients being discharged from an
Emergency Department after an anaphylactic reaction. These patients should be provided
with the following:
• an adrenaline auto-injector script for up to a maximum of 3 adrenaline auto-injectors
and an appropriate emergency action plan (including digitised action plans) as per
the Australasian Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy (ASCIA)’s
recommendation;
• if not already diagnosed with anaphylaxis, the patient should be given a priority
referral (this referral must be for the period four to six weeks after discharge) to an
immunologist or allergy specialist; and
• information pamphlets on allergies and anaphylaxis. For example, information that
outlines support and information on allergies from peak bodies such as ASCIA and
Allergy & Anaphylaxis Australia (A&AA).
Supported in principle
With the support of all Australian governments, the Australian Commission on Safety and
Quality in Health Care (Commission) has developed a national Acute Anaphylaxis Clinical
Care Standard to improve the recognition of acute anaphylaxis and the provision of
appropriate treatment and follow-up care. The standard was developed by a Topic Working
Group which included representatives from key professional and consumer organisations
and individual clinical experts. Following public consultation, the clinical care standard was
finalised through the Commission’s governance processes in June 2021 and launched on
24 November 2021. The standard has been endorsed by 15 key professional and consumer
organisations, all state and territory health departments and the Australian Government
Department of Health and Aged Care.
The Commission’s Acute Anaphylaxis Clinical Care Standard identifies the components of
care where the need for quality improvement is greatest, including prompt recognition and
treatment of anaphylaxis, and discharge management. Discharge management should
ensure that before a patient leaves a health care facility following anaphylaxis they receive:
• education about how to respond appropriately to a subsequent severe allergic
reaction;
• an ASCIA Action plan;
6
• prescription or supply of up to two adrenaline auto-injectors if recommended in
their circumstances, or advice to see their GP for a prescription as soon as possible
where an autoinjector or prescription cannot be supplied before discharge; and
• arrangements for a prompt clinical immunology or allergy specialist consultation.
The Commission has developed a Discharge Checklist and Discussion Guide (the Checklist) as
part of the suite of resources that support the clinical care standard. The Checklist is
designed to ensure that discharge management provides the components of care required
before discharge from the acute care setting and a clear pathway for follow-up care after
discharge. The Checklist provides prompts for both the patient and their treating clinicians
and includes information about where to seek support and advice for managing allergy and
avoiding anaphylaxis.
The Acute Anaphylaxis Clinical Care Standard is based on a review of the existing guidelines
and relevant literature, including the ASCIA guideline Acute Management of Anaphylaxis
(2020) and the Safer Care Victoria Anaphylaxis Clinical Care Standard (2019).
According to the Safer Care Victoria Anaphylaxis Clinical Care Standard, patients should be
discharged from an emergency department after an anaphylactic reaction with a
prescription for two PBS-subsidised adrenaline injectors (EpiPens, Anapen or similar
adrenaline injector devices) along with national resources developed by ASCIA and A&AA.
The Safer Care Victoria Anaphylaxis clinical care standard also stipulates a specialist referral
appointment be made for all patients who have experienced anaphylaxis, where possible
prior to discharge. It is recommended that patients attend an appointment with their local
general practitioner within five days after an anaphylactic event.
The arrangement described in the Safer Care Victoria Clinical Care Standard for emergency
department prescription of PBS subsidised adrenaline injectors varies between states and
territories and whether they participate in the PBS Reforms Agreement. PBS prescriptions
are unavailable in NSW and the ACT hospitals. Consequently, not all patients will have
access to an adrenaline injector on discharge unless the hospital dispenses one, the patient
visits a general practitioner to receive an authority script immediately post-discharge, or
purchases an injector privately from a pharmacy.
The PBS does not subsidise more than two adrenaline injectors at a time, however
additional adrenaline injectors can be purchased privately from pharmacies without
prescriptions. Further to this, a 500 microgram dose formulation of adrenaline injector
(brand name Anapen) was listed on the PBS in September 2021, which can deliver higher
single doses than previously available. This may reduce the number of injectors that may be
needed by individuals who may otherwise have required 2 x 300 microgram adrenaline
injectors to achieve an appropriate dose for their body weight.
7
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends that the Australasian Society of Clinical Immunology and
Allergy (ASCIA) receive ongoing long term funding to continue its partnership work with the
Department of Health and the National Allergy Strategy, to develop minimum standards of
allergy training for health professionals including:
• funding for the promotion of the e-resources ASCIA has already developed to all
relevant communities throughout Australia;
• minimum standards of allergy training in the curriculum for all university medical
schools and training of general practitioners, physicians and paediatricians, nurse
practitioners, psychologists, dietitians, and paramedics; and
• funding support for ASCIA to provide training for all health professionals listed above.
Supported
The Australian Government values its partnership with ASCIA through the National Allergy
Strategy and provides funding to implement actions of the strategy.
The Australian Government appreciates ASCIA’s commitment to making quality allergy
training available to health professionals. ASCIA’s allergy and anaphylaxis educational
resources and online e-training courses provide accessible, consistent and evidence-based
education and training about prevention, recognition, diagnosis, treatment and
management of allergies and anaphylaxis. The provision of standardised evidence-based
training reduces the likelihood of inappropriately trained people providing allergy advice
and treatment. The new funding of $16.6 million for the National Allergy Council includes
funding to scope the minimum requirements for including allergy in the curriculum for
medical and education degrees. It also includes funding to continue to upskill health
professionals by providing and expanding existing training resources and developing new
models of training delivery, particularly for regional, rural and remote health professionals
to improve access to quality care.
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government provide telehealth funding
support for doctors and allied health workers in order to provide professional services and
support to allergy patients in rural, regional and remote Australia.
Partially supported
Telehealth measures for rural and remote communities have been available since 2011,
enabling the delivery of health services via a telehealth model for eligible patients within
these communities. While there are no allergy-specific telehealth services, private
consultations are eligible for Medicare rebates to patients residing in eligible areas.
8
Targeted incentives such as the Workforce Incentive Program complement services
available through Medicare, and support team-based and multi-disciplinary models of care.
This program subsidises nurses and allied health providers for their time in General
Practices, including the provision of allergy and/or telehealth services as required.
In addition, the telehealth items introduced in response to the COVID-19 health emergency
have transitioned to permanent arrangements, effective 1 January 2022, enabling services
to be delivered by GPs, specialists and allied health professionals via phone or video. This
means telehealth is now more widely available across Australia.
As with telehealth services available since 2011, new telehealth medical and allied health
consultations may be appropriate to claim for allergy-related advice, although the suitability
of these services is a clinical judgement of the treating practitioner.
Recommendations 7 and 8
7: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider a Medical Benefits
Scheme (MBS) item number for food challenges carried out by appropriate clinicians.
8: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government provides funding for a public
health system drug de-labelling program including:
• developing a program in the public health system to run community education
campaigns to encourage people to participate in drug allergy de-labelling programs;
• create clinical guidelines for drug allergy de-labelling; and
• give consideration to the need for a Medicare Benefits Scheme (MBS) item number
for drug allergy testing and drug allergy challenges.
Partially supported
The Government relies on a positive recommendation from the independent Medical
Services Advisory Committee (MSAC) in order for a new medical service to be funded
through the MBS (such as an item for a qualified practitioner to conduct a food or drug
challenge). MSAC appraises new medical services and provides advice to Government on
whether they should be publicly funded based on an assessment of its comparative safety,
clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness, using the best available evidence. As such, an
application to MSAC is required before a Government decision to MBS list a new service
could be made. Anyone is able to submit an application to the MSAC, however due to the
level of evidence required, a medical professional group is generally best placed to provide
the necessary research and trial data. More information about the MSAC process is available
at www.msac.gov.au.
The new Government funding for allergies will allow the National Allergy Council to examine
and provide advice on the breadth, clinical effectiveness and cost effectiveness of allergy
treatments and gather evidence required for a MSAC application.
9
The Government is supportive of public hospitals operating clinics for drug allergy de-
labelling, and notes that some public hospitals have existing services. Where states and
territories deliver de-labelling services as part of their public hospital immunology and
allergy clinics and other specialist services, the Commonwealth makes a funding
contribution towards the costs of these services through the National Health Reform
Agreement arrangements. The MBS also contains several items which provide Medicare
rebates for skin testing for allergens, including item 12004 for the testing of skin for drug
allergens.
The new funding for the National Allergy Council will support it to engage with the
Australian Commission of Safety and Quality in Health Care for the development of
nationally standardised drug allergy de-labelling guidelines, with assistance from the new
National Allergy Centre of Excellence.
Recommendation 9
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government should mandate consistent
labelling for all products containing chlorhexidine, iodine and latex to ensure consumers and
healthcare workers can readily identify these products. In addition:
• alternatives for chlorhexidine, iodine and latex should be readily available;
• all government procurement should maintain a database of all chlorhexidine, iodine
and latex containing products;
• the broader healthcare sector should be educated about the risks of anaphylaxis to
chlorhexidine, iodine and latex.
Partially supported
Chlorhexidine and iodine must already be clearly identified on medicine labels as they are
active pharmaceutical ingredients. Similarly, when present in medical devices, chlorhexidine
and iodine are identified on labelling or packaging.
In addition, certain substances that are allergens or present health risks to some consumers
must by law be declared on medicine labels. While not included on this list, latex has been
identified for inclusion in the next update. Existing labelling requirements for medical
devices also require the declaration of latex.
There are a number of alternatives to chlorhexidine and iodine registered for use by the
Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), and the majority of medicines in vials do not use
latex-containing vial stoppers. Decisions on procurement and establishment of product
databases are a matter for the states and territory governments as they manage
procurement for their hospital systems.
TGA publishes advice on risks of anaphylaxis from particular medicinal substances on its
website and in the Medicines Safety Update, a publication that goes out on a regular basis
10
to healthcare professionals. For example, there was a recent warning in the Medicines
Safety Update about the risk of anaphylaxis from chlorhexidine impregnated central venous
catheters.
Recommendation 10
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government provide additional funding
support to ensure the Royal Hobart Hospital can provide ongoing Jack Jumper Ant venom
immunotherapy treatment to Australians in all states and territories.
Noted
The Royal Hobart Hospital is the sole manufacturer of Jack Jumper Ant (JJA) Active
Pharmaceutical Ingredient (API) for venom immunotherapy treatment. However, API is not
the final manufactured product given to patients undergoing immunotherapy treatment.
The final manufactured product uses API to produce a clinical grade venom and diluent that
can be supplied across state borders.
Presently, the Royal Hobart Hospital is the only hospital in Australia licenced by the
Therapeutics Goods Administration (TGA) to manufacture JJA API, permitting distribution of
API to other states and territories within Australia.
JJA API is supplied to Victoria and South Australia, which now have venom immunotherapy
clinics available at Monash Health and the Royal Adelaide Hospital. The provision of venom
immunotherapy treatment varies between states in cost, wait times, and delivery in private
and public health systems.
The Australian Government notes funding to enable the Tasmanian JJA Program to continue
expanding to other states and territories including Victoria, Southern New South Wales,
Australian Capital Territory and South Australia. The Minister for Health and Aged Care will
write to respective state and territory health ministers requesting consideration and further
information on the cost of supporting this recommendation. The Australian Government will
consider options based on this information, with key consideration to the significant labour
involved in harvesting raw material from JJA, the extensive quality control testing before it
can be distributed interstate and the Tasmanian JJA Program’s capacity to increase supply.
11
Recommendation 11
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with states and
territories to ensure that all allergy and anaphylaxis fatalities receive an automatic referral
to the coroner for assessment.
Supported in principle
The Government supports the automatic referral of allergy and anaphylaxis to the coroner,
as this will build the evidence base to help inform health policy, interventions and research
priorities. The Minister for Health and Aged Care will write to states and territories urging
them to implement this recommendation.
Recommendation 12
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with the Therapeutic
Goods Administration (TGA) to:
• proactively encourage competition for pharmaceutical companies to supply
alternative adrenaline auto-injectors to the Australian market in order to prevent
future shortages;
• investigate the expiry dates of adrenaline auto-injectors; and
• investigate reasons for intermittent supply of adrenaline auto-injectors.
Partially supported
Approval of a new medicine and its registration on the Australian Register of Therapeutic
Goods may not result in multiple alternative adrenaline injections immediately becoming
available for patients. While submission of an application of regulatory approval and on-
going supply to the market is a commercial decision for suppliers, the TGA has met with
sponsors of alternative adrenaline autoinjectors to encourage them to make a regulatory
submission. In many instances, supply decisions are heavily dependent on PBS listing.
The TGA evaluates stability data provided by the company to confirm the maximum period
during which the quality of a medicine can be reliably maintained. However, the active
ingredient in Epipens, adrenaline, is chemically unstable, limiting the product’s shelf-life.
The TGA has investigated the reasons for the intermittent shortages of adrenaline auto-
injectors in recent years. There appear to be recurrent manufacturing problems which have
impacted on supply across several countries. TGA has an active role in assisting with
mitigation strategies when anticipated shortages are notified to the TGA (which is now
mandatory following 2018 amendments to the Therapeutic Goods Act 1989).
In March 2021, the TGA approved the registration of three new adrenaline pen products
(Anapen). The evaluation of these submissions was appropriately prioritised considering the
12
unstable supply of adrenaline containing medicines and their importance to Australians with
allergy and anaphylaxis.
Recommendation 13
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with states and
territories to:
• review the sufficiency of the current allergist and immunologist workforce in
hospitals throughout Australia; and
• ensure that there is funding for increased placements of these specialists in all
hospitals (if a need is found).
Supported in principle
The mix and volume of services delivered by public hospitals and the associated workforce
composition is determined by state and territory governments and their public hospital
administrators. Under the existing National Health Reform Agreement arrangements, the
Commonwealth will provide a funding contribution towards the costs, including for
workforce, of allergy and immunology services delivered by states and territories through
their public hospitals.
The Government can provide data on the current allergist and immunologist workforce in
hospitals but does not have any demand data to be able to review the sufficiency of the
workforce. Under the National Medical Workforce Strategy, a data strategy is underway
which includes supply and demand modelling work. The Minister for Health and Aged Care
will write to his state and territory counterparts to request data which will assist with this
work. Having an agreed demand methodology and improved data sets through the data
strategy will support evidence-based policy and funding decisions on workforce in the
future.
Training for allergists and immunologists is provided through advanced training positions in
public hospitals and as such does not fit the criteria for the Commonwealth funded
specialist training program. However, given the small specialist nature of this workforce, a
collaborative approach between commonwealth and state and territory governments and
the specialist college to conduct workforce planning for this cohort would be appropriate.
13
Recommendation 14
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government review all work, health and
safety standards within vocational education training to ensure all food service and food
preparation training modules include training on allergies and anaphylaxis, including the
prevention of food cross contact.
Supported in principle
The Australian Industry and Skills Committee (AISC) is responsible for approving nationally
recognised vocational education and training (VET) training packages for implementation
and providing industry advice to Commonwealth, state and territory governments.
The AISC is supported in this role by a network of 67 Industry Reference Committees (IRCs),
made up of industry experts who understand the skills needs of their sector, industry or
occupation. VET Training Package qualifications are reviewed and updated regularly to
reflect changes in technology, work practices or other regulatory changes. Processes are
also in place to enable rapid training responses to urgent and emerging industry skills needs
where required.
The Tourism, Travel and Hospitality IRC has reviewed the Cookery components of the SIT
Tourism, Travel and Hospitality Training Package. Content regarding allergies and
anaphylaxis and cross-contamination between foodstuffs and other items was updated
during the course of this review. Updated qualifications were published to the national
register on 10 June 2022, and are now available for delivery by Registered Training
Organisations.
The new National Allergy Council will be funded to engage with Skills IQ and the Australian
Skills Quality Authority to review existing accredited hospitality training courses and
incorporate minimum standards for food allergen management training into these courses.
Recommendation 15
The Committee recommends that the Allergen Bureau in collaboration with Food Standards
Australia New Zealand (FSANZ), work with the food industry to encourage the consistent use
of the VITAL food allergen risk assessment program, including the introduction of a VITAL ‘V’
tick on packaging to inform consumers that a product has been through this process.
Fully supported
The Allergen Bureau is an industry body which aims to share information and experience
within the food industry on the management of food allergens. It administers the Voluntary
Incidental Trace Allergen Labelling (VITAL) program. The VITAL program is a standardised
risk assessment process for food industry to assess the potential impact of allergen cross-
contact and to inform decisions regarding appropriate allergen management and labelling.
14
Since 2015, the Allergen Bureau has reported an increasing uptake of the VITAL Program
both locally and internationally.
In 2019, the Allergen Bureau developed the VITAL Standard, which is a certification version
of the VITAL program that provides for the use of a VITAL ‘V’ tick on packaging to inform
consumers that a product has been through the process.
FSANZ recognises the critical importance of allergen labelling on food to help consumers
living with food allergies make safe choices. FSANZ convenes the Allergen Collaboration,
which includes representation from food manufacturing, food service, allergy support
groups (including the Allergen Bureau), health professionals and government. The
Collaboration works together to explore non-regulatory measures that can improve the
management of food allergens.
FSANZ will work with the Allergen Bureau and the Collaboration to provide information on
the VITAL program and encourage industry to use VITAL as a tool in its allergen
management and labelling.
Recommendation 16
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with state and territories
to mandate allergen regulations for all hospitals, to ensure that allergen free meals are
made available to all patients.
Supported in principle
The previous Government provided funding to implement activities under the National
Allergy Strategy, a partnership between ASCIA and A&AA. One of the activities is a nationally
standardised training course for hospital food service to improve food provision in all
hospitals. The free online course, All about Allergens for Hospitals, was launched in
September 2020. It is aimed at all staff involved in the food service chain in a hospital and
contains four different versions to ensure the training is applicable to the role of the staff
member undertaking the training. The four versions are targeted at: kitchen managers and
supervisors; kitchen staff; ward managers and nurses; and ward support staff. The training is
available free of charge via the Food Allergy Training website:
www.foodallergytraining.org.au.
The former Minister for Health wrote to the Chief Executive Officers of all hospitals in
Australia in November 2020 to encourage them to make use of this resource. The Minister
for Health and Aged Care will write to his state and territory counterparts urging them to
mandate allergen regulations for all hospitals, including mandating training for hospital
staff.
15
Recommendation 17
The Committee recommends that Food Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) expedites
the finalisation of the Plain English Allergy Labelling (PEAL) process before September 2020
and informs the Committee once the process has been finalised.
Partially supported
Plain English allergen labelling (PEAL) was a proposal to amend the Australia New Zealand
Food Standard Code (the Code) to introduce requirements to make allergen labelling
clearer, more consistent and in plain English.
The Government supports this work to better enable food allergic consumers make safe
food choices. Given the significance of the proposed changes, the Food Ministers Meeting
(including the previous Australian Government ministers) supported a timeframe which
allowed FSANZ to thoroughly complete its assessment processes, including consideration of
the available evidence and public consultation.
In December 2020, FSANZ publicly notified that the FSANZ Board had approved the changes
to the Code and notified the then Australia and New Zealand Ministerial Forum on Food
Regulation (the Forum). As the Forum did not request a review of FSANZ’s decision, the
required changes to allergen labelling were gazetted and became law on 25 February 2021.
The food industry has three years to transition to the new labelling requirements.
Recommendation 18
The Committee recommends that Food Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) prioritises
work in relation to reformulation labels on products. Any product that has changed its
ingredients should have either new packaging alerting consumers to the reformulation, or
should have a sticker placed on the front stating clearly that new ingredients have been
added.
Partially supported
In 2019, FSANZ consulted with key stakeholders on allergen risk management associated
with food product reformulation including labelling.
The food industry reported on the various voluntary labelling practices that are used to alert
consumers to the presence of a food allergen introduced as a result of reformulation. This
includes changes to the statement of ingredients, front of pack statements (for example
‘reformulated’, ‘new recipe’ or ‘check allergen advice’), or labelling devices such as flags or
banners. Off-label practices, such as social media alerts, company website information and
on-shelf product segregation between original and reformulated products, are also widely
used. Some companies also notify allergy support groups, which then disseminate the
information through their own networks.
16
Allergy support groups noted food allergic individuals are advised to always refer to the
statement of ingredients, irrespective of being familiar with a food product to ensure the
product can be safely consumed.
In 2019 the Australian Food and Grocery Council updated its best practice industry
guidance1 with advice to clearly differentiate products when recipe changes result in a
change of allergen status.
The Government recognises the importance for food allergic consumers to be able to make
safe food choice and supports the initiatives used by the food industry to alert consumers to
reformulation where the allergen status of the food product has changed. FSANZ will work
with the food industry and the Allergen Collaboration to promote these existing initiatives.
Recommendation 19
The Committee recommends that all staff at Australian primary and secondary schools
receive nationally consistent education and training for recognising and responding to
anaphylaxis.
Supported in principle
The Government notes that ASCIA has already developed modular online education and
training for staff at Australian primary and secondary schools for recognising and responding
to anaphylaxis. The new National Allergy Council funding will allow ASCIA to continue to
provide these educational resources and training for free for all users. The
Minister for Education will write to the state and territory education ministers and non-
government education authorities to advocate for all school staff to receive the specific
training developed by ASCIA. The use of ASCIA’s training will ensure high quality, nationally
consistent, education and training materials are available across Australia.
The National Allergy Strategy used previous Government funding to develop Best Practice
Guidelines for the prevention and management of anaphylaxis in schools and children’s
education and care (ECEC), which were published in October 2021. The Best Practice
Guidelines are available online on the Allergy Aware resource hub for schools and children’s
education and care services (www.allergyaware.org.au). The new 2022-23 funding for the
National Allergy Council includes funding for a communication strategy, consumer
education, and ASCIA e-training for schools, ECEC and the community. It will also allow for
the Best Practice Guidelines to be progressed to minimum standards.
1 AFGC and Allergen Bureau Food Industry Guide to Allergen Management and Labelling for Australia and New
Zealand (2019)
17
Recommendation 20
The Committee recommends that the Department of Health work with the Australasian
Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy (ASCIA) and all states and territories to ensure
that treatment for anaphylaxis be incorporated into a nationally standardised first aid
training course, and if necessary to provide additional funding to first aid training providers
to facilitate this.
Supported in principle
The First Aid Industry Reference Committee is responsible for the national training package
units of competency relating to first aid which underpin nationally recognised training in this
area.
The HLTAID011 Provide First Aid unit of competency was updated in October 2020 and
addresses the management of allergic reactions and anaphylaxis. This unit is included in
over 300 nationally recognised training qualifications and is also widely delivered by
Registered Training Organisations as a stand-alone first aid course.
Recommendation 21
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with the Australasian
Society of Clinical Immunology and Allergy (ASCIA) and state and territories to include
information about allergies and anaphylaxis education and training into undergraduate
teacher training degrees, learning support assistant training and childcare worker vocational
education training.
Supported in principle
The Government is committed to improving the effectiveness and capability of the teaching
profession. The new funding for the National Allergy Council will allow it to scope the
minimum requirements for including allergy in the curriculum for medical and education
undergraduate degrees.
The Accreditation of Initial Teacher Education Programs in Australia: Standards and
Procedures (the accreditation standards) require initial teacher education programs to
prepare pre-service teachers to meet the Graduate career stage of the Australian
Professional Standards for Teachers (the Teacher Standards). The Teacher Standards include
a requirement under Focus Area 4.4 that teachers must maintain student safety and be
aware of strategies that support students’ wellbeing and safety within the school and/or
system, curriculum and legislative requirements. However, the standards do not specify
program content. As universities are autonomous entities established under state and
territory legislation, decisions about course offerings and course content are a matter for
universities.
18
The Department of Education will work through the Australian Council of Deans of
Education to raise the visibility of this recommendation with Initial Teacher Education
providers and encourage the inclusion of information about allergies and anaphylaxis in
their course content.
Under the Education and Care Services National Regulations, early childhood education and
care services must meet mandatory requirements in relation to staff members with first aid
qualifications, anaphylaxis management training, and emergency asthma management
training.
Vocational education and training qualifications relevant to learning support assistants,
childcare workers, and workers in out-of-school-hours care settings were updated in
May 2021.
The unit of competency HLTAID012 Provide First Aid in and education and care setting,
which includes content relating to allergies and anaphylaxis, is included as a learning
requirement (core unit) of the Certificate III in Early Childhood Education and Care, which is
the entry level qualification for early childhood educators.
This unit is also included as a core unit in the relevant qualification for outside school hours
care workers. The unit is an elective in the qualifications that support the learning support
assistant job role.
Recommendation 22
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government requires that all airlines in and
out of Australia undertake the following to assist with customers requiring anaphylaxis care:
• seats of travellers who have emergency care plans for anaphylaxis should be wiped
down before boarding;
• cabin crew should receive first aid training that includes anaphylaxis training,
recognising symptoms of anaphylaxis and an understanding of how to administer an
adrenaline auto-injector; and
• require all first aid kits on domestic and international flights entering and departing
Australia to carry at least two adrenaline auto-injectors.
Partially supported
The Government notes that major airlines have access to ASCIA resources such as
anaphylaxis training, general use adrenaline autoinjectors, airline specific ASCIA Action Plans
for Anaphylaxis that can be used as a poster and stored with first aid adrenaline
autoinjectors, and other resources.
The Board of Airline Representatives of Australia (BARA), which represents 33 international
airlines operating into Australia and carries 90 percent of international passengers to and
from Australia, has advised that international airlines undertake a range of inflight practices
19
and carry a range of equipment to assist with customers requiring anaphylaxis care
consistent with training and equipment requirements.
Where passengers notify airlines of their emergency care plans, action can be taken by the
airline in responding to requests to wipe down seats, noting some passengers prefer to do
this themselves at the time of boarding.
Qantas, Virgin Australia and BARA have advised that cabin crew are trained for a range of
medical incidents. This includes recognising and managing anaphylaxis and awareness on
the use of adrenaline auto-injectors, noting some passengers carry these with them in the
cabin and wish to administer injections to themselves or have this done by a carer travelling
with them.
International aircraft operators have also advised that they have medical kits which have
supplies of Epi-Pens for adults and children.
Recommendation 23
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government give consideration of how best
to increase the utilisation of nurses and allied health care workers to support the care of
patients with allergic disease.
Fully supported
Through the Workforce Incentive Program (WIP), the Government is improving access to
quality medical, allied health and nursing services in regional, rural and remote areas and
supporting team-based care. The WIP – Practice Stream provides financial incentives of
more than $400 million per year to encourage general practices across Australia to engage
allied health professionals, nurses and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health
Workers/Health Practitioners as part of a multidisciplinary team. Practices consider the
needs of their community when determining which health professional (or combination of)
to engage, which provides flexibility to address gaps in availability or accessibility of
particular health services.
The Australian Government Department of Health and Aged Care is leading the
development of Australia’s first National Nursing Workforce Strategy (Strategy). The
Strategy will set out a vision for the future of nursing in Australia as well as priorities to help
support a capable, resilient nursing profession delivering person-centred, evidence-based,
compassionate care across all sectors. The development of the Strategy will provide an
opportunity for in-depth consideration of issues, from a range of perspectives, to influence
the nursing workforce of the future.
A Nurse Practitioner 10 Year Plan (Plan) is also under development. The Plan will describe a
set of actions that can be taken to address nurse practitioner workforce issues of national
significance and enhance the delivery of nursing care to the Australian community. It will
20
have 1-3 year, 5 year and 10 year goals. Development of the Plan will occur concurrently
with development of the National Nursing Workforce Strategy, due to the critical role nurse
practitioners play in broader nursing career pathways and health care outcomes. The
Strategy and the Plan will provide an opportunity for the Government to consider how the
nursing workforce can support and work with allergy sufferers.
Recommendation 24
The Committee recommends that the Therapeutic Goods Administration and any other
relevant authorities, such as the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC)
conduct an independent, evidence-based review into all therapeutic goods, services, or
devices which claim to diagnose or treat allergies.
Partially supported
The ACCC does not specifically regulate therapeutic goods, with regulatory responsibility for
the safety and efficacy of these goods falling to the TGA. The ACCC seeks to avoid
duplicating the supervisory activities of specialist regulators and cannot replicate the
therapeutic based expertise that a specialist regulator like the TGA can deliver.
Reviews of medicines and devices are undertaken by the TGA on a risk-assessed basis and
may be instigated in response to a variety of signals, such as an increased trend in adverse
event reports, newly identified risks, reports of lack of efficacy, or reports from other
international regulators, health care professionals or members of the public.
The TGA undertakes evidence reviews for particular products and product groups in
response to these signals and has the powers to take a range of regulatory actions, including
withdrawal of the market approval for the product, if the sponsoring company for the
product does not hold evidence to support claims such as reliable diagnosis or treatment of
allergies. However, funding and staffing resources would not permit a full review of all
therapeutic goods (including medical devices) which claim to diagnose or treat allergies. In
addition, the TGA does not have regulatory responsibility for the delivery of medical
services.
Some products which claim to diagnose or treat allergies may be medicines and medical
devices that are not included in the Australian Register of Therapeutic Goods (ARTG)
(described as ‘unapproved’). These have not been evaluated by the TGA for quality, safety,
efficacy or performance. For various reasons, there are times when approved and available
products may not meet the needs of all patients and clinical situations. In recognition of
this, there are provisions that allow doctors and patients to access ‘unapproved’ treatments
from overseas. These provisions include the Personal Importation Scheme, Special Access
Scheme (SAS) and Authorised Prescriber Scheme. The primary responsibility for the decision
to use an ‘unapproved’ therapeutic good for a patient is placed on the prescribing medical
21
practitioner and they must obtain the informed consent of each patient for whom they
prescribe an unapproved good.
22
