Australian Government response to the House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Industry,
Innovation, Science and Resources report:
The Now Frontier: Developing Australia’s Space Industry
December 2022
1
This page intentionally left blank
2
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the opportunity to respond to the report of the House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Industry, Innovation, Science and Resources’ Inquiry into
developing Australia’s space industry, The Now Frontier: Developing Australia’s Space Industry (the
Inquiry Report). The Australian Government thanks the Committee for its work, and the wide range of
organisations and individuals who made contributions to this Inquiry.
The Inquiry Report was tabled in the House of Representatives on 2 December 2021. It made 38
recommendations for consideration of the Australian Government, encompassing coordination of
national space policy, regulation and sustainability of space activities, improving systems and
processes, national priorities for investment and resilience, international partnerships, space science,
workforce, and access to markets. The report also recognised the role of space technologies in
enabling a modern economy in Australia, as well as opportunities to derive greater benefits.
The Australian Government is focused on building a high wage, high productivity, and sustainable
growth economy. Central to this is Australia being a country that makes things and one where
Australian research, innovation, design and technology is commercialised here, creates jobs and
sovereign capability, and is exported to the world.
Space has become a critical enabler of modern economies, and as a consequence our dependency on
space technologies has grown. The Australian Government welcomes this report’s contribution to the
Government’s future agenda on space. Part of that will be development of a robust and resilient
space sector that can help achieve a future that is made in Australia. The Inquiry Report draws out
that legacy approaches to growing the sector are no longer enough to assure a resilient, capable, and
globally competitive space sector in Australia. The Australian Government, with key commitments
including its Future Made in Australia Plan, the $15 billion National Reconstruction Fund and the Buy
Australian Plan, is committed to ensuring a strong and sustainable domestic industry. In turn, the
space sector can play an important role in achieving the aims of these programs.
3
Australian Government responses to Inquiry recommendations
Number Recommendation Australian Government Response
1 (2.104) The committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government in consultation with
industry seek to define: This recommendation will be considered in line with
 an overarching vision for the Australian the Australian Government’s future agenda.
space industry
 a set of long term national space Consideration will take into account government
priorities to guide and galvanise the priorities including critical technology development
Australian space industry (such as robotics, quantum computing and artificial
with the aim of inspiring the Australian intelligence) and relevant reviews such as the Defence
public, providing investment confidence, Strategic Review.
developing Australian space capabilities and
positioning Australia as a globally
competitive player
1 (2.105) The committee recommends that these Agreed
national missions be informed by the seven
civil space priority roadmaps The Australian Space Agency’s roadmaps present
pathways for Australia’s space sector to capture
international supply chain opportunities and support
the capability needs of government. Roadmaps on
Communications technologies and services, Earth
observation from space, and Robotics and automation
on earth and in space are published and available at
https://www.industry.gov.au/australian-space-agency.
2 (2.106) The committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government review the way it
delivers funding to the Australian space The Australian Government has a clear economic plan
industry with a focus on the development of and budget strategy that will lift investment and build
space capability and capacity. This includes: prosperity across the country. All Australian
• broadening the funding streams to Government departments are expected to focus their
include contracts for specific space efforts and resourcing to prioritise investments which
capability are smart, responsible and targeted to align with
• the necessity for industry co-funding government priorities.
where private entities are likely to be
commercially disadvantaged The $15 billion National Reconstruction Fund will
diversify and transform Australia’s economy and
industry, providing finance to drive investments that
add value and capability in seven priority areas. This will
help rebuild Australia’s industrial capability and create
secure, well paid jobs across the economy.
4
3 (2.107) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government examine ways to
better coordinate and align civil and defence The Australian Government notes the Defence Strategic
space priorities and investment. Review, due to be delivered in early 2023, will consider
Defence's force posture and force structure and help
Defence to better understand where it should prioritise
investment, including Defence capability investment
broadly, and Defence space capability investment.
The Australian Government notes the multiple existing
linkages between Defence and the Australian Space
Agency.
3 (2.108) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government work with industry
to identify current and future opportunities Australian Defence space requirements have been
for the civil space sector to support derived from existing strategic guidance and will be
Australian defence space requirements, considered through the Defence Strategic Review
including on projects such as DEF 799. process, due to be delivered in early 2023. The
Australian Space Agency will work with Defence to
understand those requirements and consult industry to
identify opportunities.
4 (2.109) The Committee recommends that the Noted
Australian Government establish a whole of
government Ministerial Council on Space The Australian Government notes that a number of
that comprises representatives from formal and ongoing consultative and representative
Commonwealth and State and Territory bodies relating to Australia’s space industry are
governments, stakeholders and industry operating and are routinely reviewed with the objective
groups to oversee the further development of continuous improvement.
and coordination of the Australian space
industry as a whole. The Australian Space Agency is consulting with state
and territory governments on models to coordinate the
development of Australia’s space industry. This includes
consideration of high level bodies that would drive a
national approach, as is the case in other nations with
space capabilities.
5
5 (2.110) The Committee recommends that the Noted
Australian Government review or
strengthen procurement policies and The Australian Government supports the development
guidelines to ensure that Australian owned of strong sovereign industry sectors that supply to
and operated space industry content is used critical national systems, and will continue to support
where reasonably possible.
Australian industries to be competitive on a domestic
and international level. This can be seen through a
range of initiatives including the 10 point Buy Australian
Plan.
The Buy Australian Plan is part of the Australian
Government’s strategy to drive economic growth,
rebuild and diversify Australia’s industrial base and
leverage government procurement to create
sustainable industries.
Building a more robust domestic industry capability,
consistent with Australia’s international trade
obligations, through the Government’s purchasing
power will increase the nation’s supply chain resilience,
encourage innovation, improve broader economic,
social and environmental outcomes, and support
business recovery from recent and future economic
shocks, such as those caused by the COVID-19
pandemic.
Actions taken by Government in relation to
procurement will consider and balance factors
including international trade obligations, achieving
value for money, the need to develop sovereign
capability and mitigating supply chain vulnerabilities.
5 (2.111) As part of these procurement guidelines Noted
Australian Government departments and
agencies be required to set out the rationale
See response to recommendation 5 (2.110).
for procurement of any space products and
services obtained from overseas, including
why such a capability could not be sourced
domestically.
5 (2.112) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government identify suitable
points of contact within the Australian Space The Business Information Contact Centre (AusIndustry),
Agency or the broader Department of in the Department of Industry, Science and Resources
Industry, Science, Energy and Resources to (DISR), is an integral part of the Australian
assist industry navigate government Government’s front door for business, providing
procurement processes. support, advice and referrals. The contact centre forms
an important part of the Department's outreach
function to business, including the space sector. These
outreach functions include business.gov.au.
6
6 (2.113) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government examine the
feasibility of establishing an expert technical The Australian Government will consider the need for
advisor, similar to the model adopted in the independent technical advice to inform procurement of
United States, to support government with space based products and services as part of its future
procurement of space based products and agenda.
services, and the development of national
missions.
7 (2.114) The Committee recommends that the Noted
Australian Government examine options to
increase the visibility of space across the The Australian Government recognises the importance
Government and Parliament to emphasize of communicating the relevance and benefits of space
its importance and communicate its to Australians. The Australian Space Agency will
relevance to Australians. This could include continue to lead the coordination of space across the
but not be limited to: Australian Government, Parliament, and the
 (a) Incorporating space as a specific community more broadly.
focus of a joint or house
parliamentary committee, including Response provided against each sub-point of
in the name of the committee recommendation 7 (2.114) below:
 (b) Ensuring that a research
position within the Parliamentary (a) Noted
Library covers space related issues The Australian Government notes that matters relating
to ensure that adequate research to joint or house parliamentary committees are a
support is available to Members matter for consideration by Parliament.
and Senators
 (c) Ensuring that adequate (b) Noted
positions across the Australian The Australian Government notes that this is a matter
public service can cover the for the Parliamentary Librarian and the presiding
breadth of space related issued and officers to consider.
matters as they relate to particular
departments and agencies. (c) Agreed in principle
Employment of appropriately skilled people in space-
related roles and activities are a matter for the
responsible departments and agencies.
8 (2.115) The Committee recommends that, as part of Agreed
the Australian Space Agency’s post
operational review, the following matters be The Australian Government agrees to give
given careful consideration: consideration to this recommendation.
 Establishing the Australian Space
Agency as a statutory authority
 Separating its industry engagement and
regulatory functions
 Future workforce requirements,
including engaging more staff with
industry experience and technical
expertise as required
 Budget and resourcing to ensure that it
is adequately positioned to meet its
stated goals and objectives.
7
9 (3.136) The Committee recommends that the Noted
Australian Government define Australian
sovereignty as it relates to the development The Australian Government recognises the importance
of Australian space capability to ensure that of ensuring sovereignty in critical areas of the economy.
Australia's space related interests are
promoted and protected.
10 (3.137) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government identify in
consultation with the Australian space The Australian Government will consider this
industry particular national space recommendation in line with its future agenda,
capabilities that can be designed, built and including through the National Reconstruction Fund.
delivered by industry.
The Australian Space Agency’s roadmaps inform
pathways for Australia’s space sector to grow and
capture supply chain opportunities that support
Australia’s sovereign capability needs.
11 (3.138) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government consider ways to
encourage stronger commercially attractive The Australian Government acknowledges the role of
partnerships between global space primes global space primes in transferring technical knowledge
and Australian businesses. These strategies to Australian industry and integrating Australian small
should seek to engage and prioritise those and medium enterprises (SMEs) into global supply
companies that can demonstrate a chains. The Australian Government also recognises the
commitment to growing the Australian strength of Australian ideas that, given the right access
space sector. to capital, can be uplifted to contribute to national
wellbeing.
The Australian Government operates a number of
programs to support Australian businesses to access
international markets, including through Austrade.
11 (3.139) The Committee recommends that this Noted
includes establishing a program to assist
SMEs connect with primes and navigate the The Australian Government is committed to supporting
broader global space industry more the growth of small to medium-sized enterprises
generally. (SMEs) and recognises the importance that expanding
connections into global supply chains plays in achieving
this.
8
12 (3.140) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government pursue policy
settings that incentivise private sector The Australian Government’s $15 billion National
investment in industry development Reconstruction Fund will diversify and transform
including such things as matched funding or Australia’s economy and industry, providing finance to
co-funding, taxation incentives, and public drive investments that add value and capability in
and private partnerships. seven priority areas. This will help rebuild Australia’s
industrial capability and create secure, well paid jobs
across the economy.
The Australian Space Agency will work with the
Department of Industry, Science and Resources to
explore mechanisms for supporting the Australian
space sector through the National Reconstruction
Fund, noting the broad application of space technology,
including defence enabling capabilities (e.g. robotics),
critical technologies (e.g. quantum computing) and
advanced manufacturing.
Additionally, the Australian Government operates a
number of programs aimed at attracting and
supporting strategic international investment, led by
Austrade.
Refer to the response for Recommendation 2 (2.106).
13 (3.141) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government expand support to
SMEs to improve connections in global The Australian Government is committed to supporting
supply chains. the growth of SMEs and recognises the importance that
expanding connections into global supply chains plays
in achieving this. Support for SMEs will be consistent
with international agreements to open and non-
discriminatory trade.
The Australian Government operates a number of
programs to support Australian businesses to access
international markets, including through Austrade.
13 (3.142) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government streamline access to
funding mechanisms and increase efficiency The Australian Government is committed to reducing
of investment by reducing complexity and complexity and enhancing transparency in how it funds
enhancing transparency. the support of Australian industry.
The Australian Government is establishing the National
Reconstruction Fund, which will provide investment to
priority areas to help ensure Australian ideas are
commercialised in Australia.
9
14 (3.143) The Committee recommends that space be Noted
identified as a key infrastructure priority
area. It recommends a national assessment The Australian Government will give consideration to
of Australia’s current and future space this recommendation in line with its future agenda.
infrastructure requirements with particular
emphasis on developing sovereign capability
in identified areas.
14 (3.144) This assessment should acknowledge the Noted
need for industry to access a range of
infrastructure for research and This recommendation will be considered in line with
development, and manufacture. It should the Australian Government’s future agenda.
build on the preliminary work set out by the
SmartSat CRC.
14 (3.145) The Committee recommends further Noted
consultation with Infrastructure Australia to
establish whether it is best placed to The Australian Space Agency consults broadly across
undertake this work in consultation with government in relation to space related infrastructure,
industry. leveraging engagement mechanisms of various
portfolios to support consultation with the space
sector. This includes the Department of Education in
relation to national research infrastructure, the
Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional
Development, Communications and the Arts and its
portfolio agencies in relation to broader infrastructure,
and the Department of Home Affairs, particularly its
Cyber and Infrastructure Security Centre.
15 (3.146) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government, in consultation with
industry, examine the requirement to use The Australian Government recognises the importance
international standards such as those used of international standards for accessing global supply
by the European Space Agency and NASA for chains and meeting the expectations of the
all Commonwealth space procurements. international marketplace.
The Australian Space Agency is leading the Australian
Government’s activities in regard to civil Australian
space sector standards. Recent activities include the
Agency commencing the process for Australia’s
participation in the International Organization for
Standardisation’s TC20 standard (relating to aircraft
and space vehicles). Additionally, the Agency is an
observer member of the international Interagency
Operations Advisory Group (IOAG) which deals with
global matters related to space communications with a
focus on interagency interoperability and standards.
The Australian Government will continue to consult
extensively on this matter.
10
16 (3.147) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government develop a specific
ABS classification to provide a more The Australian Space Agency reports on the size,
accurate picture of the size of the Australian growth and other metrics of the space sector biennially
space industry and to help track its value through publishing economic snapshot reports.
and growth.
The Agency, in consultation with the ABS, is working to
improve the basis for data collection in measuring
change and growth in the Australian space sector.
17 (3.148) The Committee recommends that the Agreed
Australian Government foster the growth of
Earth Observation from space and data The Australian Government recognises the importance
processing capabilities that benefit Australia of Earth Observation data to the Australian economy
across every sector of the economy. and the Australian Space Agency released the space
technology roadmap on Earth Observation From Space
in November 2021.
18 (3.149) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government identify other off-
Earth opportunities in partnership with The Australian Space Agency, and other Australian
international agencies. Government Agencies, engage with international
counterparts to identify opportunities for partnerships
and collaboration, including in relation to off-Earth
activities.
The Agency is currently partnering with international
agencies to collaborate on off-Earth opportunities, such
as NASA’s return to the moon through the Artemis
mission, and the Indian Space Research Organisation’s
(ISRO’s) Gaganyaan Human Spaceflight program. Other
international engagements include the Bureau of
Meteorology’s collaboration with various agencies on
meteorological satellites, and also with the Five Eyes
Meteorological Community of Practice (the MET-5)
including Canada, New Zealand, United Kingdom and
the United States Air Force on Space Weather.
Geoscience Australia and the Agency are also
collaborating with the United States to develop satellite
systems that will improve the quality of satellite Earth
observation data, supporting improved monitoring of
climate change impacts. CSIRO engages with NASA and
the European Space Agency on deep space
communications and spacecraft tracking, and with
these and other international agencies on science and
research collaborations.
11
18 (3.150) The Committee recommends that Agreed in Principle
consideration be given to developing a
mechanism to identify and develop The Australian Government will consider this
innovative space proposals such as space recommendation, including mechanisms for backing
solar power technology in Australia. Australian ideas and supporting commercialisation of
innovative Australian technology that aligns with
national needs.
The Australian Government notes mechanisms in
Defence (the Defence Innovation Hub and the Defence
Science and Technology Star-Shot program) and CSIRO
(including the Space Technology Future Science
Platform) that identify and develop innovative
technological proposals relevant to government
Defence, science and industry priorities.
19 (3.151) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government undertake broader
industry engagement to: The Australian Government’s Jobs and Skills Summit,
held 1-2 September 2022, brought Australians together
 Create awareness in adjacent sectors of
to agree on immediate actions to help build a stronger
opportunities to participate in the
economy and a stronger Australia. As an agreed
Australian space industry
outcome, the Australian Government has announced
 Identify relevant skills and expertise
support for a Digital and Tech Skills compact between
within adjacent industries that could be
government, unions and technology employers. The
transferable to the Australian space
compact affirms commitment from industry,
industry
government and unions to cooperate to help address
skill shortages and grow the Australian tech sector.
The Australian Government has also committed to
releasing an Employment White Paper, which will
further help shape the future of Australia’s labour
market.
The Australian Space Agency is exploring the space
sector’s skills pipeline and workforce development
needs to help inform this process. The Agency’s work
will include considerations of how to improve the
transferability of skills from sectors adjacent to space
and maximise opportunities for the wider workforce to
participate in the Australian space sector.
The Agency’s consideration of ways to secure the space
workforce pipeline will be informed by the work
undertaken by organisations such as Jobs and Skills
Australia and the SmartSat Cooperative Research
Centre which has worked extensively with Australian
industry to design an Australian Space Skills Taxonomy
and to identify the future skills demands of the sector.
12
19 (3.152) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government better promote and
engage non-STEM industries such as law, Refer to the response provided to Recommendation 19
economics, finance, business and advisory (3.151).
services to ensure that these sectors are
well equipped to support and maintain the The Australian Government is aware of the broad range
operation of the Australian space industry of professionals from non-STEM sectors that will need
and provide a specialist service in an to contribute to technology intensive sectors, including
international market. space.
The Australian Space Agency’s consideration of ways to
secure the space workforce pipeline will consider a
pathway forward that recognises all the sub-sectors
and diverse skills that underpin Australia’s space
industry.
20 (3.153) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government examine ways to
better support and coordinate space The Australian Space Agency will work with other
medicine research, training and organisations, such as the Australian Antarctic Division
development to ensure that the and CSIRO, to support space medicine research,
translational benefits of aerospace medicine training and development through a number of
can be applied on Earth. collaborations across government.
The Applied Space Medicine and Life Sciences roadmap,
currently under development, will complement this
work, and take into account Australia’s niche capability
in this domain.
21 (4.77) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government consider a national
launch plan or strategy to support a The Australian Government will consider this
sovereign capability in Australia including recommendation in line with its future agenda. The
the investment, infrastructure and expertise Australian Space Agency’s Access to Space roadmap,
required. This includes development of currently under development, will inform this process.
policies that preference Australian launch
capability to support government space
requirements.
13
22 (4.78) The Committee recommends that the Agreed
Australian Government give consideration
to further reforms to the Space (Launch and The Australian Space Agency works collaboratively with
Returns) Act 2018 and Rules 2019, in industry and government to carry out its regulatory
consultation with industry to ensure that function effectively to ensure its regulatory framework
regulatory provisions: is globally competitive, and its activities meet
 Support the growth and Australia’s domestic and international obligations, such
competitiveness of the Australian as through maintaining robust environmental
domestic industry performance, without overburdening industry.
 Ensure the safe and responsible
management of the space environment
 Are in line with the regulations used by
similar space countries
It is recommended that further engagement
be undertaken with government and
industry to determine the most suitable
regulatory changes to best benefit growth
and investment. Consideration may be given
to the Adelaide Law School supplementary
submission given to the inquiry.
23 (4.79) The Committee recommends that the Noted
Australian Government give consideration
to further suspending or amending the The Australian Government does not currently charge
Australian launch permit application fees to fees for launch applications.
ensure that Australian businesses are not
financially or commercially disadvantaged,
and remain competitive with other space
countries.
24 (4.80) The Committee recommends that the Agreed
Australian Government establish dedicated
and effective industry engagement The Australian Space Agency has established a
mechanisms to guide stakeholders through dedicated section within its Office of the Space
the application and regulatory processes. Regulator focusing on effective industry engagement.
This includes designated staff within the This section will focus on guidance documents as well
Australian Space Agency to work with as establishing mechanisms to engage with industry
industry, and the development of publicly stakeholders and other interested parties through the
available guidance documents. application and regulatory processes.
25 (5.65) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government continue its
investment in sovereign situational space The Australian Government supports investing in
awareness and situational domain sovereign situational awareness and space domain
awareness capability including the awareness, including the infrastructure to support it.
infrastructure to support it.
The Australian Space Agency’s Space Situational
Awareness and Debris Mitigation roadmap, currently
under development, will provide guidance on
opportunities for industry participation.
14
26 (5.66) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government take a lead role
internationally in implementing the Long The Australian Government will continue to work with
Term Sustainability Guidelines for the the Australian space sector and Member States of the
United Nations Committee on the Peaceful United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Uses of Outer Space. Outer Space (COPUOS) regarding implementation of
the Long Term Sustainability Guidelines, including
through the COPUOS Working Group on the Long Term
Sustainability of Outer Space Activities.
To complement Australia’s existing regulatory
frameworks and international commitments, the
Australian Government will explore the need for a
space sustainability framework to guide how Australia
will carry out space activities responsibly, and approach
implementation of the Long-Term Sustainability of
Outer Space Activities (LTS) guidelines.
27 (5.67) The Committee recommends that Australian Agreed in Principle
regulators prioritise post-mission disposal,
debris-neutral missions plans, and The Australian Government acknowledges the
organisational capacity in identifying viable importance of the sustainable and responsible use of
space projects. space, as well as its broader impact on the terrestrial
and marine environment; and notes that this is under
consideration by the Australian Space Agency as part of
development of the Space Situational Awareness and
Debris Mitigation roadmap. A debris mitigation strategy
based on an internationally recognised guideline or
standard is a requirement for permits authorised under
the Space (Launches and Returns) Act 2018. The
Australian Government considers a number of factors
when identifying viable space projects including
capacity to deliver, incentivising private investment and
impact to the broader space industry. The Australian
Government will continue to consult to ensure that the
ongoing development of Australia’s space industry
meets all applicable environmental standards.
28 (5.68) The Committee recommends that the Agreed
Australian Government continue to
participate in international forums to: The Australian Government is committed to the
 Clarify how international law development and implementation of norms that seek
impacts commercial activities in to ensure the safety, stability and sustainability of outer
space space, and will continue to participate in international
 Lead the development of forums such as the UN Open Ended Working Group
enforceable and internationally (OEWG) on Reducing Space Threats through Norms,
agreed norms of behaviour in outer Rules and Principles of Responsible Behaviours, the UN
space Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
(COPUOS), and through other multi-lateral forums such
as the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue (Quad) Space
Working Group. In May 2022, Quad Leaders agreed to
consult on rules, norms, guidelines and principles for
the sustainable use of space through the Quad Space
Working Group.
15
29 (5.69) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government examine the
feasibility of more green technology in the The Australian Government is committed to reducing
Australian space sector, and ways to ensure Australia’s emissions to 43 per cent below 2005 levels
that the industry is not contributing to an by 2030 and achieving net zero emissions by 2050.
already congested environment. Emissions targets have been enshrined in legislation.
All industries, including the space sector, will need to
work collaboratively to transition to green technology
and achieve emissions targets. Australian Government
initiatives, such as the National Reconstruction Fund,
will support industry to maximise the benefits of new
green technology.
The Australian Space Agency’s Space Situational
Awareness and Debris Mitigation roadmap, currently
under development, will, through the lens of industry
opportunities, provide recommendations to minimise
new debris and manage the risks generated from
existing debris.
30 (6.89) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government prioritise and
promote the importance of space science as The Australian Government acknowledges the
fundamental to innovation and growth of importance of science, including space science, as a key
the Australian space sector. This includes: enabler of innovation and growth within the Australian
 Specific reference to space science economy, and will give consideration to this
in the Australian Space Agency's recommendation in line with the Government’s future
Charter and Australian Civil Space agenda.
Strategy
 Examining options for better The Australian Government is also renewing the
coordination of space science National Science and Research Priorities and National
across Commonwealth and state Science Statement to ensure they reflect Australia’s
and territory agencies; and modern society and provide a vision for the Australian
 Identifying a set of national space science system.
science research and innovation
priorities to enable stakeholders to
make informed decisions regarding
investment and research and
development.
31 (6.90) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government review the model
for research and industry collaboration to The Australian Government recognises that increasing
ensure that it fosters the best outcomes to collaboration between businesses, research
support innovation, development of space organisations and government in Australia will improve
capability, and industry growth. commercialisation outcomes, drive productivity growth
and create new jobs.
The Australian Government will consider mechanisms
to foster research and industry collaboration to achieve
these outcomes, which could be facilitated through
initiatives such as the National Reconstruction Fund
and the Cooperative Research Centres (CRC) Program.
16
31 (6.91) This includes access by academia and Agreed in Principle
industry to cross sector research funding
streams and programs. The Australian Government is committed to supporting
Australian business and academia to collaborate and
undertake cross sector research that will stimulate the
growth of industries such as the Australian space
industry.
The Australian Government will consider opportunities
for cross-sector research funding streams and
programs through initiatives such as the CRC Program
and the National Reconstruction Fund.
32 (6.92) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government examine options to
protect the intellectual property security of The Australian Government recognises the importance
stakeholders within the Australian space of keeping Australia’s home-grown space innovation
industry to ensure that collaboration and intellectual property (IP) secure to encourage
between academics, industry and collaboration between academics, industry and
government can occur in a secure government.
environment.
The Australian Government notes the programs and
resources already in place to assist Australian
companies to protect themselves from IP theft. This
includes the Australian Cyber Security Strategy 2020 to
confront cyber threats including intellectual property
theft, as well as the University Foreign Interference
Taskforce’s (UFIT) Guidelines to Counter Foreign
Interference in the Australian University Sector. UFIT
sets out principles designed to strengthen the
resilience of Australian universities against threats to
intellectual property, whilst maintaining their ability to
collaborate on and commercialise their research. IP
Australia’s SME Portal assists small and medium
businesses to access detailed information on IP rights
and usage.
32 (6.93) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government consider options for
industry to commercialise publicly funded The Australian Government recognises the importance
research and development and intellectual that successful commercialisation of research and
property creation in a competitive development and generation of new intellectual
environment. property play in driving the growth of Australia’s space
sector.
The Australian Government will consider options for
further driving commercialisation of research and
generation of new intellectual property.
17
33 (7.80) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government develop a
community education and outreach The Australian Government has announced immediate
program to promote the diversity of actions from the Jobs and Skills Summit, including a
employment, careers and opportunities review of existing STEM government programs that can
within the space sector. be reformed to support greater diversity in Australia’s
growing STEM sector.
As part of its responsibility to inspire the Australian
community and the next generation of space
entrepreneurs, the Australian Space Agency works with
industry, the education sector and other stakeholders
to promote the role space plays in improving the lives
of Australians, impacts of the space sector on the
economy, and its important role in supporting STEM
activities.
The Agency is considering ways to secure the space
workforce pipeline and will continue to consult with
Australian industry on measures to promote the
diversity of opportunities within the space sector.
33 (7.81) This campaign should also target Agreed in Principle
underrepresented groups within the space
industry to help increase diversity across the The Australian Government recognises the value of
sector. increasing and highlighting employment and
participation opportunities for underrepresented
groups in Australia’s space sector and associated
education and careers pathways.
The Australian Space Agency is considering ways to
secure the space workforce pipeline that will support
the outcomes of the Australian Government’s Jobs and
Skills Summit, which included a commitment to review
STEM programs to attract and retain more women,
First Nations people, Australians in regions, those who
are culturally and linguistically diverse, people with a
disability and Australians from low socio-economic
backgrounds into STEM careers.
The Government also announced actions from the Jobs
and Skills Summit for strengthened requirements for
employers with 500 or more employees to commit to
measurable targets to improve gender equality in their
workplaces.
18
34 (7.82) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government promote the value
of STEM through primary, secondary and The Australian Government recognises the value of
tertiary years to ensure a continued pipeline STEM-related education in maintaining a future supply
of specialist and technical expertise is of highly trained and educated workers to support and
available to support and sustain the sustain the Australian space sector.
Australian space sector.
The Australian Space Agency is considering ways to
secure the space workforce pipeline that will consider
linkages to government programs to grow STEM
education and employment pathways, guided by the
outcomes of the Jobs and Skills Summit.
35 (7.83) The Committee recommends that the Agreed
Australian Government examines options to
improve education to industry pathways The Australian Space Agency is considering ways to
within the sector. secure the space workforce pipeline and will consider
options to improve education and training pathways
and raise awareness of potential career pathways into
the Australian space sector. This work will be informed
and supported by the outcomes of the Jobs and Skills
Summit, including for digital and tech fields.
36 (7.84) The Committee recommends that the Agreed in Principle
Australian Government introduce a program
to better connect adjacent industries with The Australian Space Agency is considering ways to
transferrable skills to the space industry. secure the space workforce pipeline, informed by
consultation across government and industry.
This work will consider pathways for improving the
interconnectedness of Australia’s space industry with
adjacent sectors to promote greater skills transfer, as
well as consideration of options to attract international
talent and commercial enterprise to the Australian
space industry.
37 (7.85) The Committee recommends that the Noted
Australian Government examine ways to
maximise the benefits of rural and regional The Australian Government notes that the space
Australia to foster the growth of the industry is well positioned to support remote and
Australian space industry. regional communities, and is supportive of
communities wishing to explore opportunities to
engage in space activities.
Australia’s regional areas already host a significant
number of space facilities used to communicate with
satellites, improve space data and monitor deep space.
The Australian Government has committed to an
improvement in NBN satellite services that will improve
regional Australian access to the internet through
increased data allowances and unmetered usage
between midnight and 4 pm.
19
38 (7.86) The Committee recommends that the Agreed
Australian Government examine options to
improve engagement and relocation of The Australian Space Agency’s consideration of ways to
international workers and commercial secure the space workforce pipeline will include
enterprise to the space industry. consideration of options to attract global talent,
including Australian expats, and commercial enterprise
to the Australian space industry. This work will be
informed and supported by the outcomes of the Jobs
and Skills Summit.
20
