Australian Government response to the House
of Representatives Select Committee on Social
Media and Online Safety report
March 2023
Contents
Establishment of the Inquiry .............................................................................................. 2
Australian Government response ...................................................................................... 3
The Government’s online safety agenda ....................................................................................... 3
1. Implementation of the Online Safety Act .................................................................................. 4
2. Tackling gaps in the current framework .................................................................................... 4
Digital and media literacy .................................................................................................... 4
Online hate speech .............................................................................................................. 5
Misinformation and disinformation .................................................................................... 5
Online scams ....................................................................................................................... 6
Gambling-like content in online games ............................................................................... 6
Online dating safety ............................................................................................................ 7
Privacy Act Review............................................................................................................... 7
3. Cross-government coordination on online harms ..................................................................... 7
The Government’s response to recommendations of the Committee ................................. 9
Resourcing for the eSafety Commissioner, education, awareness and engagement with youth, and
law enforcement ............................................................................................................................ 9
Funding eSafety ................................................................................................................... 9
Raising awareness of support and resources .................................................................... 10
Online safety education .................................................................................................... 11
Youth engagement ............................................................................................................ 12
Training for law enforcement ............................................................................................ 12
Technology-facilitated abuse ....................................................................................................... 13
Emerging harms and emerging solutions .................................................................................... 14
Online abuse of public figures ........................................................................................... 14
Encryption ......................................................................................................................... 14
Algorithms ......................................................................................................................... 15
Encouraging industry transparency and accountability .................................................... 16
Parliamentary oversight and a review of online safety ............................................................... 17
Parliamentary oversight .................................................................................................... 17
Review of the regulatory framework ................................................................................ 18
Conclusion ................................................................................................................................... 19
Appendix ...................................................................................................................................... 20
Australia’s online safety framework .................................................................................. 20
Terms of Reference ........................................................................................................... 21
List of Recommendations .................................................................................................. 22
Developing the Government response ............................................................................. 26
Establishment of the Inquiry
This is the Australian Government’s Response to the Final Report of the House Select Committee on
Social Media and Online Safety (the Committee), which was presented on 15 March 2022.
The Government notes that this Committee was established on 1 December 2021 in the final sitting
week of 2021 towards the end of the final term of the Morrison Government.
The Inquiry was established to consider a range of matters related to online safety and the actions of
digital industry in Australia, yet commenced before the Online Safety Act 2021, which empowered the
eSafety Commissioner with a range of new powers to support online safety, came into effect on
23 January 2022. The Inquiry had broad-ranging terms of reference but was required to report in only
4 months and to hold the bulk of its hearings over the summer period. While the Committee provided
its report to Government in March 2022, the former Government did not respond before the Parliament
was prorogued.
The Albanese Government takes its commitment to protect Australians from all forms of online harms
seriously. We understand the importance of listening and responding to Australians who are impacted
by online harms, particularly those who are most vulnerable. We have taken the time to consult widely
across the Australian Government on our response to the Final Report to ensure it provides a
comprehensive view of the work underway in relation to the matters considered by the Committee.
This response provides detail on work underway across a number of portfolios, including
Communications, Home Affairs, Attorney-General’s and Social Services, and work being led by
Australia’s independent online safety regulator, the eSafety Commissioner.
We appreciate the work of the Committee and would like to thank everyone who contributed to the
Inquiry into Social Media and Online Safety.
2
Australian Government response
The Government’s online safety agenda
The safety of Australians is a core priority of the Albanese Government, including online. It is
fundamental that our online world, which is so much a part of our daily lives, provides safe and inclusive
environments, maximises the benefits of the digital economy and supports social cohesion.
These goals require a holistic, multi-faceted approach, including a robust legislative framework, strong
regulators which can hold platforms to account, technological measures to prevent harms, and a
population with high levels of digital and media literacy.
Australia has a strong track record in online safety. The Online Safety Act 2021, and the mechanisms in
the preceding Enhancing Online Safety Act 2015 and Broadcasting Services Act 1992 set out a novel
system for the removal of harmful content online and the provision of education, support and advice to
help Australians stay safe online and get help when things go wrong.
But the online world is continually changing and Australia’s approach needs to evolve. The Albanese
Government is pursuing three immediate priorities.
First, is the effective implementation and ongoing review of the Online Safety Act.
The Albanese Government remains committed to the coordinated and systematic implementation of
the Online Safety Act (the Act). This regulation received bipartisan support in the parliament, and the
Albanese Government is now working with the eSafety Commissioner to undertake the critical work to
implement the Act following its commencement in January 2022. The Government is also focused on
driving awareness of eSafety so Australians can access and make the most of eSafety’s resources.
While the Act has a wide scope, and plays an important role in promoting safe online environments, it
does not address all risks, and there remain a number of gaps in the broader online safety equation in
Australia.
Our second priority is tackling gaps in the current framework. There is a need for additional and
complementary policy levers that will enable us to be responsive to emerging risks and opportunities as
technology advances and as consumer preferences change. In recognition of this, we are taking action
across a range of workstreams to address these gaps. This work is being led by a number of portfolios
across the Government.
Our third priority is supporting cross-government coordination on the regulation of online harms.
We recognise that to deliver on our overarching goal of providing safe and inclusive online
environments that maximise the benefits of the digital economy and support social cohesion, we must
be coordinated in our efforts. The Albanese Government is committed to ensuring the regulation of
online harms is coordinated, and that engagement between community, industry and civil society
stakeholders and the Government is streamlined.
This document details work underway to deliver on each of these priorities and provides the
Government’s response to the specific recommendations made by the Committee.
3
1. Implementation of the Online Safety Act
The Online Safety Act (the Act) sets out a world-leading framework comprising complaints-based
schemes to respond to individual pieces of content, mechanisms to require increased transparency
around industry’s efforts to support user safety, and a set of industry codes to establish a baseline for
what the digital industry need to do to address illegal and seriously harmful content and activity
facilitated by their services.
The ongoing implementation of the Act is a key priority for the Government and the eSafety
Commissioner. In December 2022, the eSafety Commissioner published a summary of industry’s
responses to the first set of reporting notices issued under the Basic Online Safety Expectations (BOSE),
which related to child sexual exploitation and abuse material. A second round of notices were issued in
February 2023 and further notices will be issued over coming months, with the focus areas informed by
the criteria set out in the Act. In addition, the eSafety Commissioner will shortly make a decision on
whether to register industry codes aimed at addressing the most seriously harmful online content.
The eSafety Commissioner also continues its vital education and awareness-raising activities, working
closely with the education sector, law enforcement, civil society and the broader community to build
awareness around online safety. This includes supporting children and their teachers, parents and
carers to navigate the online world safely; raising awareness of resources eSafety has developed to
support vulnerable groups; and strengthening referral pathways so that regardless of where someone
goes when they experience online harm, they receive the support they need.
An independent review of the Act must commence by January 2025 and is to consider whether any
amendments to the Act or the rules are required. Recognising that the online world is evolving quickly,
the Albanese Government commits to undertake and complete this review earlier than required and
within this term of Government so that Australia and our world-leading online safety framework remain
fit for the changing online environment.
2. Tackling gaps in the current framework
Over the coming months, the Australian Government will take immediate action on a range of online
harms that are not adequately captured under existing regulatory frameworks, as well as deliver on a
key election commitment to make digital and media literacy products developed by the Alannah &
Madeline Foundation freely available to all schools in Australia. Those harms with work underway
include: online hate speech, mis- and disinformation, scams, gambling-like content in online games, and
online dating safety.
The Attorney-General has launched a national consultation on the Privacy Act Review and will take
forward critical work which stagnated under the former government to ensure Australia’s privacy
framework is fit for the digital world.
In March 2023, the Government will receive the Age Verification Roadmap developed by eSafety in
response to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Social Policy and Legal Affairs report,
‘Protecting the age of innocence’, which asked eSafety to consider if, and how, a mandatory age
verification mechanism could practically be achieved in Australia. A response to the Roadmap is
expected later in 2023.
Digital and media literacy
Digital literacy – the ability to use technology and understand how digital environments work – and
media literacy – the ability to critically engage with media of all types in all aspects of life – are critical
for equipping Australians to have positive experiences in online settings. Media literacy can also
4
improve social cohesion; increase civic engagement; and empower individuals to be positive agents for
cultural change. It is important that individuals have the skills and competencies to curate their own
experience of the digital world and to self-mediate their exposure to a myriad of influences online.
Equally, industry must facilitate and encourage the development of these skills by providing tools and
information for users.
In the 2022-23 October Budget, the Government committed $6 million over three years for the national
rollout of the eSmart Digital Licence+, eSmart Junior Digital Licence+ and eSmart Media Literacy Lab.
These eLearning tools, developed and delivered by the Alannah & Madeline Foundation, will be freely
available to all schools in Australia, not just those that can afford them. The tools will help Australian
students develop the skills they need to be critical, safe, responsible and active citizens online.
Media literacy is a lifelong process. The Government recognises we need to better understand the state
of media literacy levels in Australia, who in our society will need additional support and what that
support will look like. Work is underway across Commonwealth departments and agencies to align
objectives, principles and priority focus areas linked to media literacy.
Online hate speech
All people are entitled to respect, equality, dignity, and to be free from hatred or harassment, including
in the online world. Hatred and hate speech can dehumanise and denigrate particular groups, create
division in the community and undermine Australian values such as social cohesion, freedom of
expression and inclusiveness. In the online environment, it can spread faster and further than in an
offline environment, magnifying its impacts.
The online world has also seen the emergence of new forms of hate and the re-emergence of others,
including Holocaust denial, extreme misogyny and racist hate speech. Some communities
disproportionately experience online hate speech, including First Nations people, people from culturally
and linguistically diverse backgrounds, religious groups, the LGBTQI+ community and people with
disability.
While the Online Safety Act includes some mechanisms to address more extreme forms of hate speech
(for example, instances of hateful or dehumanising commentary where it meets the definition of ‘adult
cyber abuse’; and against material that incites violence or promotes crime or terrorism), it does not
confer specific powers on the eSafety Commissioner in relation to online hate or vilification, particularly
that which targets groups and communities. Action to address this harm is long overdue.
The Government is considering what more can be done to address group hate speech online. We will
take a principled and evidence-based approach to ensure the response is effective and supports
members of our community who are targeted by online hate.
Misinformation and disinformation
The Government is committed to protecting Australians and our democratic values from the harmful
spread of dis- and misinformation online. Dis- and misinformation, while not regulated by the Online
Safety Act, forms a significant component of the broader online safety environment, and their rapid
spread via digital platforms has become a significant problem. They erode trust in democratic
institutions, undermine public health efforts, contribute to social division, and can be a vector of foreign
interference.
In June 2021, the Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA) delivered a report to the
former Government – A report to government on the adequacy of digital platforms’ disinformation and
news quality measures. In response, the Government has announced plans to give the ACMA new
5
information gathering, record keeping, and reserve code registration and standard making powers to
strengthen the current voluntary industry framework to combat online dis- and misinformation.
These powers are intended to ensure transparency in the implementation of measures by platforms to
combat dis- and misinformation; provide increased visibility of systemic issues; incentivise platforms to
act; and, if platform actions prove insufficient, provide Government with avenues for intervention by
registering industry codes or making a standard. The powers will focus on systemic issues, not individual
pieces of content, and are intended to complement the existing voluntary industry code.
Consultation on the Exposure Draft of the Bill for these powers will occur in the first half of 2023, with
legislation to be introduced by the end of the year.
Online scams
Every year, scams cost Australians, businesses and the economy billions of dollars and cause untold
emotional harm and mental stress to victims and their families.
In its 2022 Targeting Scams report, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC)
stated that nearly $1.8 billion in losses were reported to Scamwatch, ReportCyber, various financial
organisations and other government agencies in 2021. Taking into consideration that around 30 per
cent of scam victims don’t report, the estimated real loss is well over $2 billion. In addition, the
percentage of online scams is growing faster than any other medium. Financial losses reported to
Scamwatch from scams conducted via social networking and mobile apps almost doubled between 2020
($49 million) and 2021 ($92 million). However, the cost of scams is far more than just financial – scams
also lead to emotional stress and can have life changing consequences for many individuals, families,
and businesses. Older and more vulnerable Australians have been particularly preyed upon.
The Government is committed to a new long-term, coordinated, whole-of-government approach to
reduce Australians’ losses to scams. This includes through strengthening industry codes to clearly define
the private sector’s responsibilities for protecting consumers from scams, with the involvement of
industry members including banks, telecommunications providers and digital platforms; and through
the phased establishment of a National Anti-Scams Centre.
Consultation is also underway on a response to the ACCC’s fifth interim Digital Platforms Services
Inquiry report, which will inform further Government action to address scams with regard to digital
platforms.
Gambling-like content in online games
The Government appreciates that there is strong community concern about gambling-like content such
as ‘loot boxes’ and ‘simulated gambling’ in online games, particularly those played by children and
young people, due to similarities with real-world gambling and an increasing body of evidence linking
use of these games with a range of harms, including problem gambling.
The Government is consulting with state and territory governments to introduce minimum classification
ratings of M (Mature - not recommended for persons under 15 years) for games with loot boxes, and
R 18+ (restricted to adults 18 and over) for games that feature simulated gambling. These proposed
ratings will provide a stronger signal that such games may not be appropriate for children or minors.
This work responds to the growing body of evidence around harms associated with gambling-like
features in games, and also takes forward recommendations made in the 2020 Review of Australian
Classification Regulation (Stevens Review). This review was never released by the former Government,
and the Albanese Government is now beginning the important work of updating Australia’s outdated
classification scheme to make it fit for the digital world.
6
Online dating safety
Research published by the Australian Institute of Criminology in October 2022 found that three-quarters
of users were subjected to some form of online sexual violence, and one third of users were subjected
to in-person sexual violence, perpetrated by someone they met on a dating app or website.
In January 2023, the Government convened the National Roundtable on Online Dating Safety, bringing
together government; the online dating industry; the family, domestic and sexual violence sector;
diversity and inclusion organisations; and researchers to consider what more can be done to prevent
exploitation of dating apps to facilitate gender-based and sexual violence.
Roundtable participants agreed four areas of further work, including:
1. Preventing exploitation of online dating services by perpetrators;
2. Supporting users who experience harm;
3. Empowering users with information on safer online dating practices; and
4. Greater uptake of technological solutions to prevent harm.
The Government will provide an update on these outcomes by the end of March 2023.
Privacy Act Review
The Privacy Act Review Report, released by the Attorney-General in February 2023, puts forward a
range of proposals designed to ensure Australia’s privacy framework responds to new challenges in the
digital era, better aligns with global standards of information privacy protection and properly protects
Australians’ privacy.
Of particular relevance to online safety, the Report includes proposals regarding consent and privacy
default settings, targeted advertising and online content, and a Children’s Online Privacy Code which
would govern how social media and digital platforms use children’s data.
Public consultation on the Report is currently underway.
3. Cross-government coordination on online harms
Successfully addressing online harms requires a cross-portfolio effort across the Australian Government.
While responsibility for addressing online safety primarily falls in the Communications portfolio, there is
complementary work underway in the Attorney-General’s, Home Affairs, Treasury, Social Services,
Education and Industry portfolios. This reflects the reality that many harms that occur online are
extensions of harms that have long occurred in the offline world.
While there is clearly a need for significant policy action to address the substantial and evolving harms
in this space, the committee heard evidence that a lack of process coordination undermined the
effectiveness of regulation and created real costs.
The Albanese Government will take steps to ensure policy is coordinated across those portfolios with
responsibility for regulating digital platforms and addressing online harms, as well as to streamline
engagement for members of the public, industry and civil society, and ensure Government policy is
informed by up to date research about online harms.
First, to complement the work of the Digital Platform Regulators Forum which was established in
March 2022, the Government will hold a bi-annual meeting of Ministers with responsibility for
addressing online harms to discuss cross-cutting issues and ensure a joined-up approach across
Government. This will formally align policy objectives across Government to address online harms
experienced by Australians and support consideration of what other reforms may be required in a
proactive and coordinated way.
7
Second, the Government will refer matters of public interest on regulation of online harms and the
digital industry to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Communications and the Arts,
to support engagement on these important issues from across the Parliament. Utilising the existing
standing committee will support the continuation of the longstanding nonpartisan approach taken
across Government and Opposition on online safety. The Government intends the committee will have
a role in considering emerging trends, new technologies, research on online harms, and international
approaches. The Government welcomes the involvement of supplementary members on inquiries that
may be of interest to a broader range of Members of Parliament.
Conclusion
Online safety is a shared responsibility. This means that there is a role for industry, governments,
parents, carers and kin, teachers, individual users and the broader community to promote and maintain
online safety for Australians. While industry has primary responsibility for the safety of their users and
the Government is committed to ensuring industry delivers on that responsibility, we are also
committed to empowering Australians with the skills to navigate the online world safely and protect
themselves online. We want to stop harms before they occur.
We look forward to working with Australians, industry and community organisations and are committed
to hearing from diverse voices and those that have direct experience of online harms to inform our
future policy development.
The remainder of this document sets out the Government’s response to the specific recommendations
made by the Committee.
8
The Government’s response to recommendations of
the Committee
Resourcing for the eSafety Commissioner, education, awareness and
engagement with youth, and law enforcement
Funding eSafety
There are three recommendations in the Final Report which relate to eSafety funding, including: to
review funding to ensure that the eSafety Commissioner is adequately and appropriately funded
(Recommendation 25); to undertake research to better understand emerging issues, including how
cultural change is achieved in online settings (Recommendation 3); and to provide additional funding
for eSafety to establish and manage an online single point of entry reporting service for victims of online
abuse (Recommendation 6).
The Government is committed to supporting the eSafety Commissioner’s legislated responsibility to
promote online safety for Australians, and ensuring that the functions and responsibilities of the office
of the eSafety Commissioner are adequately and appropriately funded.
The Government is aware that the majority of eSafety’s funding is non-ongoing or terminating, with
annual funding forecast to decline after 2022-23, as a result of funding decisions taken by the former
Government. The Government will review eSafety’s ongoing funding in a future Budget.
The Government has developed specialist services, processes and legislative approaches in response to
the different online harm types.
 The eSafety Commissioner plays a central role for Australians to report cyberbullying of
children, adult cyber abuse, image-based abuse and illegal and restricted content (such as child
sexual abuse material) through its complaints-based schemes.
 Reports of online child sexual abuse made to eSafety must be referred to the Australian Federal
Police (AFP)-led Australian Centre to Counter Child Exploitation (ACCCE) for effective triage,
evaluation and referral for investigation.
 The ACCCE ensures appropriate and timely responses to reports of child sexual exploitation and
abuse through 24/7 rostering and on-call arrangements with specialist investigators.
 In addition to reports to eSafety and the ACCCE, Australians are also able to report specific types
of cybercrime through the ReportCyber portal (accessed at cyber.gov.au/report). ReportCyber is
hosted by the Australian Signals Directorates’ Australian Cyber Security Centre and provides an
online platform to report identity theft, online fraud, cyber security incidents, ransomware and
malware, and cyber abuse. Reports to ReportCyber are referred to the appropriate police
jurisdiction for assessment.
To build the evidence base around online harms, the Government supports research to better
understand online safety issues. There is a range of Government-funded research underway to
understand online behaviours and change approaches online. The Government supports continuing
research in this space which is undertaken by a number of agencies across Government, reflecting the
broad scope of issues and cross-government responsibility for supporting cultural change. Agencies that
undertake research in this space include eSafety, as well as the Department of Infrastructure, Transport,
Regional Development, Communications and the Arts (DITRDCA); the ACCCE; the Department of Social
9
Services (DSS); the Attorney-General’s Department (AGD); the Australian Institute of Criminology; and
the Department of Home Affairs. The Government commits to holistically consider this research to
inform the approach to any future regulation.
Raising awareness of support and resources
There are two recommendations in the Final Report regarding education and awareness campaigns;
including: a campaign focussing on digital citizenship, civics and respectful online interaction
(Recommendation 4); and a campaign to raise awareness of the eSafety Commissioner’s powers to
remove harmful content and reporting mechanisms (Recommendation 23).
The Government recognises the importance of early intervention, education and awareness campaigns
and programs in impacting cultural change. There are several existing educational and awareness
campaigns which seek to reduce the prevalence of online harms by focussing on establishing positive
behaviours, respectful online interaction and highlighting digital citizenship and civics, including:
 In the 2021–22 Budget the Australian Government committed $5.2 million for a national online
safety awareness campaign (the Campaign) to improve awareness of the support and resources
offered by the eSafety Commissioner under the Online Safety Act. The campaign had a
particular focus on women, First Nations and culturally and linguistically diverse audiences, and
people with disabilities through dedicated channels with bespoke materials. In the 2022–23
October Budget, the Australian Government committed an additional $5.0 million over five
years (2022–23 to 2026–27) to extend the Campaign which is led by DITRDCA.
 The eSafety Commissioner’s ‘SCROLL’ campaign, which launched on 20 June 2022, features
content on a range of online safety issues for young people, including on online consent and
respectful relationships, finding one’s community and ways to support friends that may be
experiencing harm online.
 DSS’s Stop it at the Start campaign aims to break the cycle of violence by encouraging adults to
reflect on their attitudes and have conversations about respectful behaviours with young
people aged 10 to 17. Four phases of the campaign have been delivered since it first launched in
2016. Additional funding was provided in the October 2022–23 Budget to deliver a fifth and
sixth phase of the campaign, which will continue to drive positive change in behaviours and
attitudes around violence against women and help to promote gender equality over time.
 Our Watch’s No Excuse for Abuse campaign, funded by DSS, aims to raise awareness of non-
physical abuse, including technological abuse. The campaign launched in 2020 and resources are
available at the No Excuse for Abuse website: https://www.noexcuseforabuse.org.au/.
 The Australian Electoral Commission introduced the Stop and Consider campaign in the lead up
to the 2019 federal election and again in the lead up to the 2022 federal election. The campaign
aims to help voters ‘Stop and Consider’ the electoral communication they encounter, including
whether it is from a reliable source, whether the information is current, and whether it may be
a scam or is safe. This engagement is focussed solely on electoral communications and is only in
the market in the lead up to a federal election.
The Australian Government also funds a range of relevant education programs, including: The Be
Connected program which provides resources and online training modules for older Australians to help
improve their digital literacy and confidence to engage safely online (run in partnership with eSafety,
DSS and the Good Things Foundation); eSafety’s Online Safety Community Grants Program; and the
Department of Education-led Consent and Respectful Relationships Program.
Despite these investments, awareness of the Safety Commissioner is low. A 2022 National Online Safety
Survey found that unprompted, only two per cent of parents surveyed identified the eSafety
10
Commissioner as an organisation they’d turn to for help with online safety. Clearly, not enough people
are aware of the eSafety Commissioner and the important resources and support that eSafety can
provide. Improving awareness of eSafety is a priority for the Government.
Online safety education
There are two recommendations in the Final Report that relate to online safety education, including: to
increase the reach of educational programs for young people (Recommendation 21); and designing and
implementing a national strategy on online safety education, including a proposed curriculum, for early
childhood, primary and secondary school students (Recommendation 22).
The Government agrees that education is vitally important when it comes to enabling Australians to
stay safe and thrive online. Work is now underway to provide education and resources to schools,
children and young people, and families.
 In the 2022–23 October Budget, the Australian Government committed $6 million over three
years (2023–24 to 2025–26) to support the national rollout of digital and media literacy
eLearning tools developed and delivered by the Alannah & Madeline Foundation. Together, the
eSmart Digital Licence+ for students aged 10 to 14, the eSmart Media Literacy Lab for secondary
students aged 12 to 16, and a new eSmart Junior Digital Licence+ for primary students aged 5 to
9 will be made freely available to every Australian school. These products will help Australian
students develop the skills they need to be critical, safe, responsible and active citizens online.
 The Australian Curriculum is developed by the Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting
Authority (ACARA), an independent statutory body. ACARA reviewed the curriculum between
2020-2022 and an updated version was endorsed by all Education Ministers on 1 April 2022 for
implementation in schools from 2023. The Australian Government plays a leadership role in
setting and advocating for national priorities in school education; state and territory
governments and non-government school authorities have responsibility for managing schools,
including implementation of the curriculum in line with system and jurisdictional policies and
requirements. In consultation with the eSafety Commissioner, ACARA made significant changes
to the Digital Technologies learning areas and the Digital Literacy general capability to ensure
that students learn to use a variety of digital platforms safely. Likewise, the Online Safety
Curriculum Connection was developed in consultation with the eSafety Commissioner and links
to a number of components in the Australian Curriculum at all year levels. The eSafety
Commissioner will continue to engage with ACARA to assist with curriculum development
related to Digital Technologies and Health, and Physical Education. Themes and topics include
online safety, mental health, and respectful relationships.
 A core function of the eSafety Commissioner is to support, encourage, conduct, accredit and
evaluate educational programs relevant to online safety. Within this remit, the eSafety
Commissioner has delivered a range of evidence-based resources to educate children and young
people, their parents and carers on preventing and responding to online harms. The eSafety
Commissioner has also developed a Best Practice Framework for Online Safety Education and a
Toolkit for Schools to support a nationally consistent approach to online safety education.
 The eSafety Commissioner provides specific educational resources, accredited teacher
professional learning, education for parents and carers, and training for other professionals
working with children and young people. The eSafety Commissioner also works with external
providers to increase access to high quality online safety education in schools. The Trusted
eSafety Provider program endorses providers of online safety education whose programs align
with the Best Practice Framework and who are required to provide information about eSafety’s
reporting mechanisms in each program they deliver.
11
 In December 2022, the eSafety Commissioner established the Online Safety Education Council
to coordinate online safety education with 22 education authorities in states and territories to
promote best practice and national consistency. The group will also raise awareness of
reporting and support agencies, and provide opportunities for better coordination of responses
to critical online safety issues.
 The eSafety Commissioner’s online safety education efforts are complemented by the AFP-led
ThinkUKnow Program. Through ThinkUKnow, the AFP delivers prevention, awareness and
education initiatives (including in-school presentations) on online child sexual exploitation and
abuse, including on online grooming.
Youth engagement
There is one recommendation in the Final Report focussing on the importance of youth engagement in
considering online safety issues (Recommendation 26).
The Government agrees that direct and formal engagement with young people on online safety issues is
essential.
To this end, the Government welcomes the establishment of the eSafety Youth Council, which is
coordinated and managed by the eSafety Commissioner and includes 24 members aged 13 to 24 years.
The Council is an important forum for Government to hear directly from young people on issues they
experience online and ways of supporting them to have positive experiences online. The Council was
appointed in April 2022 and met throughout 2022 to discuss online safety issues facing young people.
The Council will report to Government after its first 24-month term with any outcomes and actions
identified by the Council, as well as provide a 12-month interim progress report.
Training for law enforcement
There is one recommendation in the Final Report which recommends that the Government work with
the states and territories to ensure law enforcement agencies are appropriately trained on how to
support victims of online harm (Recommendation 24).
Work to implement this recommendation is already underway.
Under the National Strategy to Prevent and Respond to Child Sexual Abuse 2021–2030 (National
Strategy), the Australian Government is working with state and territory governments to enhance law
enforcement responses to child sexual abuse in all settings, including online, and to support and
empower victims and survivors.
The Government is also investing in law enforcement training, awareness raising and collaboration to
bolster the capacity of police across Australia to respond to online harms. The ACCCE, in conjunction
with states and territories, delivers specialist training programs to state and territory law enforcement
agencies aimed at: detecting child abuse material being downloaded from file sharing platforms; victim
identification awareness; and child exploitation.
The Government has committed $4.1 million over four years from 2022–23 under the Womens Safety
Package and the National Plan to End Violence against Women and Children 2022–32 (National Plan) for
AGD to develop and deliver a training package for police across Australia to enhance responses to
family, domestic and sexual violence. Training will include a particular focus on technology-facilitated
abuse, coercive control, sexual assault, child safety, and will target problematic attitudes and
behaviours. As part of delivering the training package, AGD will work closely with eSafety to leverage
existing programs, including the eSafety Women program, which deliver capacity-building training on
technology-facilitated abuse to frontline workers.
12
eSafety has memoranda of understanding (MoU) with the AFP, including the ACCCE, as well as every
state and territory police force. These are being updated to reflect eSafety’s broader powers and
functions under the Online Safety Act. These MoU arrangements provide for referral pathways from
eSafety to law enforcement agencies when online activities reach the criminal threshold, as well as from
law enforcement agencies to eSafety where it is best placed to provide support. eSafety also works
collaboratively with the AFP and state and territory police forces to ensure their awareness of eSafety’s
reporting schemes and support available on eSafety’s website. eSafety delivers customised online safety
education sessions and resources to police forces and continues to work with law enforcement to uplift
knowledge about eSafety issues.
Technology-facilitated abuse
There are two recommendations in the Final Report regarding technology-facilitated abuse; including to
conduct an inquiry into technology facilitated abuse, including how it is regulated at law
(Recommendation 7); and to significantly increase funding for specialised counselling and support
services for victim-survivors of this form of abuse (Recommendation 8).
Family, domestic and sexual violence cannot be excused or justified under any circumstance. Ensuring
the safety of all Australians is a priority of the Australian Government. The Government has committed
to provide the focus and national leadership needed to deliver change.
The National Plan, delivered in October 2022, is the cornerstone of the Government’s strategy to
address family, domestic and sexual violence, including technology-facilitated abuse. It sets the national
policy agenda for the next 10 years guiding the work of Commonwealth, state and territory
governments, family safety experts and frontline services. The National Plan’s vision is to end gender-
based violence in one generation.
To realise this vision, the Government is investing a total $1.7 billion in funding towards implementing
the National Plan and other women’s safety initiatives. This investment is being made across the
continuum of violence – from prevention and early intervention to response and recovery and healing.
The Government is mindful of the emotional toll placed on victim-survivors when asked to provide
evidence at forums such as inquiries, and thanks those victim-survivors who shared their experiences
with this Committee. The Government notes the existing evidence base on, and work underway to
address, technology-facilitated abuse, including through the eSafety Women program and research
undertaken by the Australian Institute of Criminology and Australia’s National Research Organisation for
Women’s Safety.
The National Plan addresses the issues raised in recommendations 7 and 8. The National Plan recognises
that technology-facilitated abuse is widespread and increasing, and can take many forms, including
stalking, surveillance, tracking, threats, harassment, coercive control and the non-consensual sharing of
intimate images. The focus on technology-facilitated abuse in the National Plan is supported by
appropriate funding measures in the 2022–23 October Budget, including:
 $16.6 million over four years (2022–23 to 2025–26) for eSafety to develop a helpline service.
This service will provide practical advice, support and guidance to victim-survivors of
technology-facilitated abuse, and the frontline workers who support them, within the context of
family, domestic and sexual violence.
 $57.9 million over five years (2022–23 to 2026–27) for DSS to continue the Keeping Women
Safe in their Homes and the Safe Phones programs. Keeping Women Safe in their Homes
supports victim-survivors to stay safe in their homes through risk assessments, safety planning,
home security audits and case management. Safe Phones provides phones that have been
13
safely set up to avoid technology-facilitated abuse of women that have experienced family and
domestic violence.
 Around $200 million over five years (2022–23 to 2026–27) to DSS for 1800RESPECT, the national
domestic, family and sexual violence (including technology-facilitated abuse) counselling,
information and support service which is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week for anyone
that has experienced violence, including technology-facilitated abuse.
In addition, Australia has a strong criminal offence and law enforcement framework to address
technology-facilitated abuse. This includes a comprehensive set of computer and telecommunications
offences under Parts 10.6 and 10.7 of the Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth), such as online child sexual
exploitation and abuse (section 474.22), and cyber abuse including non-consensual sharing of intimate
images (ss 474.17 and 474.17A).
The Government has also acted to address growing concerns about safety on dating apps, as a first step
convening the National Roundtable on Online Dating Safety in January 2023. This roundtable brought
together members of Commonwealth and state and territory governments and representatives from
the online dating industry; the family, domestic and sexual violence sector; diversity and inclusion
organisations; and research bodies to consider what more can be done to prevent exploitation of dating
apps to facilitate gender-based and sexual violence. Further work is being undertaken in collaboration
by DITRDCA, DSS, AGD, the Domestic, Family and Sexual Violence Commissioner, the eSafety
Commissioner, the family, domestic and sexual violence sector and the dating app industry. Minister
Rowland has agreed to provide an update on these outcomes by the end of March 2023.
Emerging harms and emerging solutions
Online abuse of public figures
There is one recommendation in the Final Report which focuses on the extent to which platforms apply
different standards to victims of online abuse if they are a public figure (Recommendation 12).
The Government agrees that all Australians should be safe online, whether they are public figures or
private citizens. Evidence heard by the Committee of examples of the online abuse experienced by
public figures is concerning and does not align with the Government’s priority that industry should
enforce their terms of service consistently and transparently.
DITRDCA will provide advice to Government, in consultation with eSafety, on whether additional
regulatory or non-regulatory options are required to address the concerns heard by the Committee
around whether different standards apply to victims of abuse depending on whether they are a public
figure.
Encryption
There is one recommendation in the Final Report which proposes that the Government should consider
the need for regulation of end-to-end encryption (E2EE) technology in the context of harm prevention
(Recommendation 10).
E2EE plays a crucial role in protecting personal data, privacy, intellectual property, trade secrets and
cyber security. Particular implementations of encryption technology, however, pose significant
challenges to public safety and security. Digital industry’s increasing adoption of anonymising
technologies such as E2EE, are making online harms easier to commit without detection, facilitating and
concealing serious national security related and criminal activity including online terrorism and violent
extremism, child sexual abuse, identity theft, and drug and firearm trafficking.
14
The Australian Government does not advocate for weakening of E2EE. Instead, it advocates through
international statements (such as the International Statement: End-To-End Encryption and Public Safety
and inclusion in the 2021 Five Country Ministerial statement) to develop greater industry, government,
and law enforcement collaboration to balance the three elements of strong and robust online trust –
privacy, safety and security. Australia also continues to engage with international partners to call for
digital industry to work with government to design their systems with user safety and protection in
mind, and to align Australia’s domestic efforts to counter online harms with emerging and maturing
international norms.
Privacy, safety, security and lawful access are not mutually exclusive. It is possible to develop
technology that protects the right to privacy, whilst also supporting law enforcement to keep the
community safe. To mitigate the use of E2EE facilitating harm, the Department of Home Affairs,
DITRDCA, eSafety, the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC), and AGD will continue
to work together to:
 gather evidence and analyse the impacts of E2EE on Australia’s national security and public
safety, including the impact of E2EE on online safety, particularly harms such as child sexual
exploitation and abuse;
 explore whole of government policy positions and solutions to mitigate the risks posed by E2EE
while maintaining privacy and security;
 support coordinated, comprehensive and constructive engagement with relevant digital
industry, including encouraging industry to take a Safety by Design approach, and to invest in
solutions that maintain safety, privacy, and security;
 examine the need for regulation of E2EE technology in the context of harm prevention, taking
into account individual privacy and online security, and implications on public trust in these
technologies;
 work with international counterparts to establish a unified and consistent approach to lawful
access.
Algorithms
There are two recommendations in the Final Report which focus on the use of algorithms in digital
platforms, including the types and scale of harms caused as a result of algorithm use
(Recommendation 13); and the potential mechanism to require digital platforms to report on their use
of algorithms (Recommendation 14).
The Government agrees that we need to better understand the operation of algorithms on digital
platforms.
The Department of Home Affairs and DITRDCA are progressing work to understand the operation of
algorithms on digital platforms. This work will also consider findings from other work underway across
Government throughout 2023, including:
 AGD is progressing the development of a Government response to the report of the Privacy Act
review, which included proposals to:
o give individuals greater transparency over how entities use personal information to
make automated decisions with a legal or similarly significant effect on individuals’
rights is used and how such decisions are made, and how individuals are targeted with
advertising and online content, including information about the use of algorithms and
profiling to recommend content;
15
o give individuals more choice by requiring individuals’ consent to their personal
information being traded and allowing individuals to opt out of their personal
information being used or disclosed for direct marketing and from receiving targeted
advertising;
o prevent harmful targeting by requiring targeting to be fair and reasonable in the
circumstances and prohibiting entities from targeting based on sensitive categories of
information (with an exception for socially beneficial content);
o protect children by prohibiting trading in children’s personal information and
prohibiting direct marketing and targeting children unless it is in the child’s best
interests;
 The Digital Platform Regulators Forum’s (DP-REG) literature review examining algorithms,
focussing on algorithm use in recommender systems, content moderation and targeted
advertising, to enhance members’ understanding of associated regulatory risks; and
 The Department of Industry, Science and Resources’ review into the regulation of artificial
intelligence and automated decision making.
The Departments will jointly report back to Government by Quarter 1 2024 with options to build
capability around future algorithm research and expertise, and with advice on whether Government
regulation of algorithms is required and, if so, what options for regulation are available.
Encouraging industry transparency and accountability
There are four recommendations which focus on the responsibility of industry to protect Australian
users. Recommendations 5 and 11 are for the eSafety Commissioner to examine a range of issues
relating to industry transparency and accountability in enforcing their terms of service and actively
preventing specific harms. Recommendations 16 and 17 propose additional proactive measures for
digital services and technology manufacturers relating to privacy and safety settings and parental
controls.
The Government agrees that industry should be held to account for the safety of their products and
services. Consistent with this approach, the Online Safety Act (the Act) includes examples of matters
that may be dealt with by industry codes or standards. The matters identified in Part 9 of the Act focus
on dealing with illegal or restricted content.
Work on industry codes is underway. The first phase of the industry codes under the Act will focus on
the most seriously harmful forms of content (such as child sexual exploitation and abuse material, and
pro-terror content). One of these codes covers equipment manufacturers and suppliers and could
include commitments relevant to parental controls. The second phase of these industry codes will focus
on children’s access to online pornography. This phase provides a further opportunity for equipment
manufacturers and suppliers to commit to providing parental control and functionality.
The eSafety Commissioner will shortly be making a decision on whether the industry codes meet the
registration requirements under the Act and provide appropriate community safeguards. If an industry
code is not registered, the eSafety Commissioner can determine an industry standard for that section of
the online industry. The Government will monitor the impact of the industry codes or industry
standards and consider whether further action is needed to implement a mandatory requirement for
technology manufacturers and providers to make available the option of parental control
functionalities.
The Act also enables the Minister to determine the BOSE. The Online Safety (Basic Online Safety
Expectations) Determination 2022 articulates the Government’s expectations for social media services,
16
relevant electronic services and designated internet services accessible from Australia, with a focus on
making sure these services take reasonable steps to keep Australians safe.
The Act allows the eSafety Commissioner to require providers of online services covered by the BOSE to
report on steps they are taking to meet the expectations. This information can include the existence of
terms of service, and the penalties that companies put in place for those breaching these terms of
service. eSafety is also able to publish statements about the extent to which services are meeting the
expectations.
The eSafety Commissioner’s powers in relation to the BOSE may require reporting on matters related to
a number of online safety concerns such as the recidivism of bad actors, pile-ons (or volumetric attacks)
and harms across multiple platforms. DITRDCA will work closely with eSafety to advise Government on
whether further regulatory interventions to address such issues are required.
Implementation of parental controls must also consider privacy impacts on children, and their right to
autonomy. The report of the Privacy Act Review proposed enshrining a principle that recognises the
best interests of the child and recommended the introduction of a Children’s Online Privacy code
modelled on the United Kingdom’s Age Appropriate Design Code. A Children’s Online Privacy code
would clarify the principles-based requirements of the Privacy Act in more prescriptive terms, and
would provide guidance on how the best interests of the child should be upheld in the design of online
services. For example, assessing a child’s capacity and establishing their age, limiting certain collections,
uses and disclosures of children’s personal information, default privacy settings, enabling children to
exercise privacy rights, and balancing parental controls with a child’s right to autonomy and privacy.
Development of the Government’s response to the Privacy Act Review report is currently underway.
Parliamentary oversight and a review of online safety
Parliamentary oversight
There are two recommendations in the Final Report which focus on Parliamentary oversight, including:
to appoint a new Standing Committee on Internet, Online Safety and Technological Matters
(Recommendation 1); and that this new committee inquire into the role of social media in relation to
democratic health and social cohesion (Recommendation 2).
The Government agrees that Parliamentary oversight is important in the context of the broad ranging
issues which arise in digital spaces. The Government will refer matters of public interest on regulation of
online harms and the digital industry to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on
Communications and the Arts. Utilising the existing standing committee will support the continuation of
the longstanding nonpartisan approach taken across Government and Opposition on online safety, and
leverage the existing structures which have been established for this very purpose. The Government
also notes that since the Social Media and Online Safety Inquiry concluded, the following committees
have been stood up or re-initiated inquiries relevant to online harms:
 Senate Select Committee on Foreign Interference through Social Media – Select Committee was
re-established on 24 November 2022.
 Senate Standing Committee on Economics (References) – Inquiry into the influence of
international digital platforms was referred on 26 September 2022.
 Joint Standing Committee on Electoral Matters (JSCEM) – Inquiry into the 2022 federal election
was referred on 5 August 2022.
 Joint Committee on Law Enforcement – Inquiry into law enforcement capabilities in relation to
child exploitation was re-initiated on 3 August 2022.
17
The JSCEM reviews all aspects of the conduct of each federal election and has previously reported on
disinformation and misinformation in the electoral context. The Government also notes the Select
Committee on Foreign Interference through Social Media will inquire into and report by 1 August 2023
on the risk posed to Australia’s democracy by foreign interference through social media. In the previous
Parliament, the committee published an interim report and a progress report prior to the 2022 federal
election.
Review of the regulatory framework
There are four recommendations in the Final Report which focus on reviewing existing regulatory
arrangements for the digital industry (Recommendation 18), including to consider: mandating platform
transparency (Recommendation 15); introducing a single regulatory framework under the Online Safety
Act to simplify regulatory arrangements (Recommendation 19); and to introduce a duty of care
requirement (Recommendation 20). Additionally, there is one recommendation to consider the
implementation of Safety by Design principles in future reviews of the Act (Recommendation 9).
The Government agrees that regulation and policy should be reviewed regularly, and notes that the
Government is reviewing this in an ongoing fashion. There are a number of reviews and policy work
already underway considering the range of regulatory frameworks that apply to digital platforms.
 The Senate Economics References Committee is conducting an inquiry into the Influence of
international digital platforms, and is due to report by the last sitting day of 2023.
 The ACCC is conducting an inquiry into digital platforms services. The ACCC released its fifth
interim report on 11 November 2022 which proposes measures to address competition and
consumer issues. The Government released a consultation paper on 20 December 2022 in
response to the report, and will be guided by a Treasury-led consultation process.
 The Privacy Act Review was released publicly on 16 February 2023. The Government will consult
on the Report to inform the development of a Government response. The proposals in the
Report are designed to ensure Australia’s privacy framework responds to new challenges in the
digital era, better aligns with global standards of information privacy protection and properly
protects Australians’ privacy.
 Under the National Strategy to Prevent and Respond to Child Sexual Abuse 2021–2030
(measure 13 of the Commonwealth Action Plan), AGD is reviewing Commonwealth child sexual
abuse offences in the Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth) to ensure that the legislative framework
relating to child sexual abuse is comprehensive, reflects offending trends, and meets the needs
of police and prosecutors.
 The Department of Home Affairs is establishing a stakeholder forum with digital industry
representatives to work with industry on more effectively enacting Subdivision H of the Criminal
Code Act 1995 (abhorrent violent material provisions) and to consult on future reforms.
 The Department of Home Affairs is also currently working towards the development of national
principles and frameworks for data security, as part of the 2023-2030 Cyber Security Strategy.
 The Department of Home Affairs’ Cyber Security Best Practice Regulation Taskforce is
undertaking work relating to cyber security regulatory frameworks across the broader digital
economy.
The Online Safety Act commenced in January 2022 and an independent review of its operation must
commence by no later than January 2025. Recognising that the online world is evolving quickly, the
Albanese Government commits to undertake and complete this review earlier than required and within
18
this term of Government so that Australia and our world-leading online safety framework remain fit for
the changing online environment. The review will consider the operation of the existing framework,
including industry codes and standards, and the BOSE reporting regime, as well as whether reforms are
required to simplify regulatory arrangements including through the introduction of a duty of care
requirement.
The outcomes of these processes will necessarily inform any future reform of legislation and regulation
related to the digital industry.
Policy and regulatory coordination
Recommendations that the online safety framework be reviewed also sought to address evidence
regarding a perceived lack of coordination across Government. As the Inquiry demonstrated, issues
surrounding online harms are complex and span across a range of government portfolios, requiring a
coordinated response.
Responsibility for specific online harms is split in line with responsibility for harms offline. For example,
relevant to the issues raised in the Inquiry, policy responsibility for online safety generally sits with the
Minister for Communications; responsibility for online defamation, human rights, anti-discrimination
and racial hatred, and privacy sits with the Attorney-General; and cyber security responsibility sits with
the Minister for Home Affairs. The eSafety Commissioner is Australia’s dedicated online safety regulator
responsible for implementing the online safety regulatory framework and has a statutory role in driving
education, research and national coordination relating to online safety.
To support a streamlined and cohesive approach to the regulation of digital platforms, the ACMA, the
ACCC, the OAIC, and the office of the eSafety Commissioner have formed the DP-REG. DP-REG is an
initiative of these four regulators to share information about, and collaborate on, cross-cutting issues
and activities on the regulation of digital platforms. This includes considering how competition,
consumer protection, privacy, online safety and data issues intersect and seeking to improve regulatory
consistency across digital platforms while retaining domain expertise.
To further strengthen whole-of-government coordination efforts and complement the work of the
DP-REG, the Government will convene a bi-annual meeting of Ministers with responsibility for online
harms. This will support identification of opportunities for cooperation across relevant portfolios,
ensuring alignment of resources and educational, awareness-raising, research and prevention activities.
Conclusion
The Australian Government appreciates the opportunity to provide its response to the report of the
House Select Committee on Social Media and Online Safety. We would like to thank members of the
Select Committee, in particular the Chair, for the constructive and bipartisan nature in which this Inquiry
was conducted. We would also like to thank every witness who provided insights into their own
experiences of online harms. The valuable evidence provided by these witnesses, and the evidence
contained in the Committee’s Final Report, will inform the Government’s continued efforts to keep all
Australians safe from online harms.
19
Appendix
Australia’s online safety framework
Online Safety Act 2021
Australia’s Online Safety Act 2021 (the Act), which commenced in January 2022, supports Australians
online by providing the eSafety Commissioner with powers to address cyberbullying of children, online
cyber abuse of adults, illegal and restricted content, and the non-consensual sharing of intimate images.
The Act makes online service providers more accountable for the online safety of the people who use
their services through the Basic Online Safety Expectations (BOSE) and the development of industry
codes or industry standards.
BOSE
While there is a role for government, users and the community, the primary responsibility to create safe
online spaces sits with industry. The BOSE articulate the minimum safety expectations of online service
providers, establishing a benchmark for online service providers to take proactive steps to protect the
community from abusive conduct and harmful content online. The eSafety Commissioner has the power
to require certain service providers to report on their compliance with these Expectations.
Industry codes
The Act also requires new codes to be developed by industry and considered by the eSafety
Commissioner for registration. The aim of the industry codes is for the online industry to do more to
regulate the access, distribution and exposure of end-users in Australia to illegal and restricted online
content – ‘class 1’ and ‘class 2’ content – under the online content scheme. Examples of material that
may be covered by the industry codes includes content showing sexual abuse of children and young
people, acts of terrorism through to content which is inappropriate for children, such as online
pornography. If the eSafety Commissioner finds the draft industry codes do not provide appropriate
community safeguards and are therefore deficient, the eSafety Commissioner may determine industry
standards.
Industry codes or industry standards apply to participants of 8 key sections of the online industry
including providers of: social media; email; messaging; gaming; dating; search engine and app
distribution services, and internet and hosting service providers; manufacturers and suppliers of
equipment used to access online services; and providers that install and maintain the equipment.
Review of the Online Safety Act
Within three years after the commencement of the Act, an independent review of the operation of the
Act and legislative rules must be conducted. This review is to consider whether any amendments to the
Act or the rules are required.
20
Terms of Reference
On 1 December 2021, the House of Representatives established the House Select Committee on Social
Media and Online Safety (the Committee) to inquire into:
a) the range of online harms that may be faced by Australians on social media and other online
platforms, including harmful content or harmful conduct;
b) evidence of:
i. the potential impacts of online harms on the mental health and wellbeing of
Australians;
ii. the extent to which algorithms used by social media platforms permit, increase or
reduce online harms to Australians;
iii. existing identity verification and age assurance policies and practices and the extent to
which they are being enforced;
c) the effectiveness, take-up and impact of industry measures, including safety features, controls,
protections and settings, to keep Australians, particularly children, safe online;
d) the effectiveness and impact of industry measures to give parents the tools they need to make
meaningful decisions to keep their children safe online;
e) the transparency and accountability required of social media platforms and online technology
companies regarding online harms experienced by their Australian users;
f) the collection and use of relevant data by industry in a safe, private and secure manner;
g) actions being pursued by the Government to keep Australians safe online; and
h) any other related matter.
Over the course of the inquiry, the Committee received 107 submissions (including supplementary
submissions) and held 11 public hearings with 55 witnesses.
The final report was tabled on 15 March 2022, with the Committee making 26 recommendations and
Labor members made a further 7.
21
List of Recommendations
Recommendation 1: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government propose the
appointment of a House Standing Committee on Internet, Online Safety and Technological Matters,
from the commencement of the next parliamentary term.
Recommendation 2: The Committee recommends that, subject to Recommendation 1, the Australian
Government propose an inquiry into the role of social media in relation to democratic health and social
cohesion, to be referred to the aforementioned committee or a related parliamentary committee.
Recommendation 3: The Committee recommends that the eSafety Commissioner undertakes research
focusing on how broader cultural change can be achieved in online settings.
Recommendation 4: Subject to the findings in Recommendation 3, the Committee recommends that
the Australian Government establishes an educational and awareness campaign targeted at all
Australians, focusing on digital citizenship, civics and respectful online interaction.
Recommendation 5: The Committee recommends that the eSafety Commissioner examine the extent
to which social media companies actively prevent:
 recidivism of bad actors
 pile-ons or volumetric attacks; and
 harms across multiple platforms.
The eSafety Commissioner should then provide the Australian Government with options for a regulatory
framework, including penalties for repeated failures.
Recommendation 6: The Committee recommends that the Office of the eSafety Commissioner be
provided with adequate appropriations to establish and manage an online single point of entry service
for victims of online abuse to report complaints and be directed to the most appropriate reporting
venue, dependent on whether their complaints meet the requisite threshold, and in consideration of a
variety of audiences such as children, parents/carers, women, people from culturally and linguistically
diverse backgrounds, and other relevant vulnerable groups.
Recommendation 7: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government refer to the
proposed House Standing Committee on Internet, Online Safety and Technological Matters, or another
committee with relevant focus and expertise, an inquiry into technology-facilitated abuse, with terms of
reference including:
 The nature and prevalence of technology-facilitated abuse;
 Responses from digital platforms and online entities in addressing technology-facilitated abuse,
including how platforms can increase the safety of their users; and
 How technology-facilitated abuse is regulated at law, including potential models for reform.
Recommendation 8: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government significantly increase
funding to support victims of technology-facilitated abuse, through existing Australian Government-
funded programs. This should include additional funding for specialised counselling and support services
for victims; and be incorporated in the next National Action Plan to End Violence Against Women and
Children 2022-2032.
Recommendation 9: The Committee recommends that future reviews of the operation of the Online
Safety Act 2021 take into consideration the implementation of the Safety by Design Principles on major
digital platforms, including social media services and long-standing platforms which require
retrospective application of the Safety by Design Principles.
22
Recommendation 10: The Committee recommends that the Department of Infrastructure, Transport,
Regional Development and Communications, in conjunction with the eSafety Commissioner and the
Department of Home Affairs, examine the need for potential regulation of end-to-end encryption
technology in the context of harm prevention.
Recommendation 11: The Committee recommends that the eSafety Commissioner, as part of the
drafting of new industry codes and implementation of the Basic Online Safety Expectations:
 Examine the extent to which social media services adequately enforce their terms of service and
community standards policies, including the efficacy and adequacy of actions against users who
breach terms of service or community standards policies;
 Examine the potential of implementing a requirement for social media services to effectively
enforce their terms of service and community standards policies (including clear penalties or
repercussions for breaches) as part of legislative frameworks governing social media platforms,
with penalties for non-compliance; and
 Examine whether volumetric attacks may be mitigated by requiring social media platforms to
maintain policies that prevent this type of abuse and that require platforms to report to the
eSafety Commissioner on their operation.
Recommendation 12: The Committee recommends that the eSafety Commissioner examine the extent
to which social media companies actively apply different standards to victims of abuse depending on
whether the victim is a public figure or requires a social media presence in the course of their
employment, and provides options for a regulatory solution that could include additions to the Basic
Online Safety Expectations.
Recommendation 13: The Committee recommends that the eSafety Commissioner, in conjunction with
the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Communications and the
Department of Home Affairs and other technical experts as necessary, conduct a review of the use of
algorithms in digital platforms, examining:
 How algorithms operate on a variety of digital platforms and services;
 The types of harm and scale of harm that can be caused as a result of algorithm use;
 The transparency levels of platforms’ content algorithms;
 The form in which regulation should take (if any); and
 A roadmap for Australian Government entities to build skills, expertise and methods for the
next generation of technological regulation in order to develop a blueprint for the regulation of
Artificial Intelligence and algorithms in relation to user and online safety, including an
assessment of current capacities and resources.
Recommendation 14: The Committee recommends that the eSafety Commissioner require social media
and other digital platforms to report on the use of algorithms, detailing evidence of harm reduction
tools and techniques to address online harm caused by algorithms. This could be achieved through the
mechanisms provided by the Basic Online Safety Expectations framework and Safety by Design
assessment tools, with the report being provided to the Australian Government to assist with further
public policy formulation.
Recommendation 15: The Committee recommends that, subject to Recommendation 19, the proposed
Digital Safety Review make recommendations to the Australian Government on potential proposals for
mandating platform transparency.
Recommendation 16: The Committee recommends the implementation of a mandatory requirement
for all digital services with a social networking component to set default privacy and safety settings at
their highest form for all users under 18 (eighteen) years of age.
23
Recommendation 17: The Committee recommends the implementation of a mandatory requirement
for all technology manufacturers and providers to ensure all digital devices sold contain optional
parental control functionalities.
Recommendation 18: The Committee recommends that the Department of Infrastructure, Transport,
Regional Development and Communications conduct a Digital Safety Review on the legislative
framework and regulation in relation to the digital industry. The Digital Safety Review should commence
no later than 18 months after the commencement of the Online Safety Act 2021, and provide its
findings to Parliament within twelve (12) months.
Recommendation 19: The Committee recommends that, subject to Recommendation 18, the Digital
Review examine the need and possible models for a single regulatory framework under the Online
Safety Act, to simplify regulatory arrangements.
Recommendation 20: The Committee recommends that the Digital Review include in its terms of
reference:
 The need to strengthen the Basic Online Safety Expectations to incorporate and formalise a
statutory duty of care towards users;
 The scope and nature of such a duty of care framework, including potential models of
implementation and operation;
 Potential methods of enforcement to ensure compliance, including penalties for non-
compliance; and
 The incorporation of the best interests of the child principle as an enforceable obligation on
social media and other digital platforms, including potential reporting mechanisms
Recommendation 21: The Committee recommends that the eSafety Commissioner:
 Increase the reach of educational programs geared at young people regarding online harms,
with a particular focus on reporting mechanisms and the nature of some online harms being a
criminal offence;
 Formalise a consultation and engagement model with young people through the Australian
Government’s Youth Advisory Council in regards to educational themes and program delivery;
and
 Report to the Parliament on the operation and outcomes of the program, including research
identifying whether this has resulted in a reduction in online harm for young people.
Recommendation 22: The Committee recommends that the eSafety Commissioner work in consultation
with the Department of Education, Skills and Employment to design and implement a national strategy
on online safety education designed for early childhood, and primary school-aged children, and
secondary school-aged young people, including:
 A proposed curriculum, informed by developmental stages and other relevant factors;
 Potential methods of rollout, including consultation and engagement with children, young
people, child development and psychology experts, digital education experts and other
specialists in online harm; and
 A roadmap provided to parents of these age groups detailing methods of addressing online
harm.
Recommendation 23: The Committee recommends that the eSafety Commissioner design and
administer an education and awareness campaign aimed at adults, particularly in relation to vulnerable
groups such as women, migrant and refugee groups, and people with disabilities, with a focus on the
eSafety Commissioner’s powers to remove harmful content and the mechanisms through which people
can report harmful content and online abuse.
24
Recommendation 24: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with states
and territories to ensure that relevant law enforcement agencies are appropriately trained on how to
support victims of online harm. This should include trauma-informed approaches as well as a
comprehensive understanding of police powers and other relevant avenues, such as the relevant
powers of the eSafety Commissioner.
Recommendation 25: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government review funding to
the eSafety Commissioner within twelve (12) months to ensure that any of the Committee’s
recommendations that are agreed to by the Government and implemented by the Office of the eSafety
Commissioner are adequately and appropriately funded for any increased resource requirements.
Recommendation 26: The Committee recommends that the Online Safety Youth Advisory Council, via
the eSafety Commissioner, provide a response to this report and its recommendations within six (6)
months of its establishment and full membership.
25
Developing the Government response
The Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications and the Arts
(DITRDCA) coordinated the development of the Australian Government’s response. DITRDCA sought
input from the following Commonwealth agencies:
 the Attorney-General’s Department;
 Australian Communications and Media Authority;
 Australian Competition and Consumer Commission;
 Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission;
 Australian Electoral Commission;
 Australian Federal Police/Australian Centre to Counter Child Exploitation;
 Australian Human Rights Commission;
 Australian Institute of Criminology;
 Australian Signals Directorate;
 Department of Education;
 Department of Finance;
 Department of Home Affairs;
 Department of Industry, Science and Resources;
 Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet;
 Department of Social Services;
 Department of the Treasury;
 Digital Transformation Agency;
 eSafety Commissioner;
 National Indigenous Australians Agency; and
 Office of the Australian Information Commissioner.
26
