Australian Government Response to the
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Social
Policy and Legal Affairs Report:
Inquiry into family, domestic and sexual violence
March 2023
1
Acknowledgement of Country
We acknowledge and pay respects to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people across Australia,
who are the custodians of the land and of the oldest continuous living culture on Earth. We honour
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples’ ongoing connection to sea, waterways and Country. We
pay respects to Elders past, present, and emerging and we acknowledge the leadership role Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander peoples have played in the development of the National Plan to End Violence
against Women and Children 2022-2032.
House Committee Report
On 4 June 2020, the House Standing Committee on Social Policy and Legal Affairs (Committee)
adopted an Inquiry into family, domestic and sexual violence (Inquiry). The Inquiry was referred by the
former Minister for Women, Senator the Hon Marise Payne, and the former Minister for Families and
Social Services, Senator the Hon Anne Ruston.
Terms of reference for the Inquiry were that the Committee inquire into and report on family, domestic
and sexual violence (FDSV), including with a view to informing the next National Plan, the following:
a. Immediate and long-term measures to prevent violence against women and their children,
and improve gender equality.
b. Best practice and lessons learnt from international experience, ranging from prevention to
early intervention and response that could be considered in an Australian context.
c. The level and impact of coordination, accountability for, and access to services and policy
responses across the Commonwealth, state and territory governments, local governments,
nongovernment and community organisations, and business.
d. The way that health, housing, access to services, including legal services, and women’s
economic independence impact on the ability of women to escape domestic violence.
e. All forms of violence against women, including, but not limited to, coercive control and
technology-facilitated abuse.
f. The adequacy of the qualitative and quantitative evidence base around the prevalence of
family and domestic violence and how to overcome limitations in the collection of nationally
consistent and timely qualitative and quantitative data including, but not limited to, court,
police, hospitalisation and housing.
g. The efficacy of perpetrator intervention programs and support services for men to help them
change their behaviour.
h. The experiences of all women, including Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women, rural
women, culturally and linguistically diverse women, LGBTQI women, women with a
disability, and women on temporary visas.
i. The impact of natural disasters and other significant events such as COVID-19, including
health requirements such as staying at home, on the prevalence of domestic violence and
provision of support services.
j. The views and experiences of frontline services, advocacy groups and others throughout this
2
unprecedented time.
k. An audit of previous parliamentary reviews focussed on family and domestic violence.
l. Any other related matters.
The Committee held public hearings over 16 days from September 2020 to December 2020. The
Committee received 298 public submissions and 55 supplementary submissions, including 47
confidential submissions, from a range of stakeholders including individuals, organisations and
Government departments.
The Committee’s final report was published on 1 April 2021. The Committee makes 88
recommendations, which seek to inform the development of the National Plan. The breadth of the
recommendations reflect the complexity of the task at hand and the Committee’s strong view that a
whole-of-society response is vital.
3
Help and Support
Violence against women and children can be a difficult topic to discuss and reading this document may
bring up strong feelings for some people. If you or someone you know needs help, please contact one
of the services below:
FAMILY, DOMESTIC AND SEXUAL VIOLENCE SUPPORT
• For information, support and counselling contact 1800RESPECT (1800 737 732) or visit
www.1800respect.org.au. This service is free, confidential and open 24 hours a day.
• Full Stop Australia – 1800 385 578
• Sexual, Domestic and Family Violence Helpline – 1800 943 539
• Rainbow Sexual, Domestic and Family Violence Helpline – 1800 497 212
• Well Mob – www.wellmob.org.au
• Men’s Referral Service – 1300 766 491
• Open Arms – Veterans & Families Counselling – 1800 011 046 or www.openarms.gov.au
• Relationships Australia – 1300 364 277
• Help is Here – www.australia.gov.au/dvsupport
CRISIS AND SUICIDE PREVENTION
• If you are, or someone else is, in immediate danger, call Triple Zero (000).
• Lifeline – 13 11 14 or www.LifeLine.org.au
• National Suicide Callback Services – 1300 659 467 or www.suicidecallbackservices.org.au
MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORT AND ADVICE
• Beyond Blue – 1300 22 4636 or www.Beyond.Blue.org.au
• ReachOut – www.au.reachout.com
• 13 YARN – 13 92 76 or www.13yarn.org.au
• MensLine Australia – 1300 78 99 78 or www.MensLine.org.au
• Kids Helpline – 1800 551 800 or www.kidshelpline.com.au
• 1800 ELDERHelp – 1800 353 374
OTHER SUPPORT
• Translating and Interpreting Service (TIS National) – 131 450
• Aboriginal Interpreter Service – 08 8999 8353
• National Relay Service
Voice relay number – 1300 555 727
o
TTY number – 133 677
o
SMS relay number – 0423 677 767
o
4
Introduction
The Australian Government is committed to keeping all people living in Australia safe now and into the
future, with the ultimate aim to end violence against women and children. All Australians deserve to
live free from fear and violence, and to be safe at home, at work, at school, in the community and
online. The Government is committed to continuing to transform the social, political and economic
aspects of our society that enable and sustain violence.
The Government is taking action to address all forms of violence against women and children, in
collaboration with states and territories, and across several key policy strategies. This includes record
funding of $1.7 billion to deliver targeted measures towards implementation of the National Plan to
End Violence against Women and Children 2022-2032 (National Plan).
This investment focuses on a range of areas from prevention through to frontline services and women’s
safety at work. It is built around the four domains of the National Plan – prevention, early intervention,
response and recovery and healing. It also acknowledges and takes into account the diverse experiences
of victim-survivors affected by FDSV.
The Inquiry reported on a broad range of matters relevant to best practice in prevention and intervening
early where violence occurs, coordinating policy responses across government and the community, and
building an evidence base about the prevalence of FDSV.
The Government appreciates the work of the Committee and thanks the many organisations and
individuals who contributed views and evidence throughout the Inquiry. In particular, the Government
acknowledges the contributions made by victim-survivors who shared their experiences with the
Committee.
The National Plan has been informed by the recommendations made in this Inquiry report, as well as
broad consultation that commenced in mid-2020, including:
• online public consultation surveys;
• targeted thematic and jurisdictional workshops;
• one-on-one interviews and small focus groups with key stakeholders and subject matter
experts;
• the National Summit on Women’s Safety and the Summit Delegate Statement;
• a dedicated consultation with 80 victim-survivor advocates;
• consultation with two advisory bodies, the National Plan Advisory Group and the Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Advisory Council on family, domestic and sexual violence;
• targeted consultation with state and territory governments.
The Government has listened to and relied on the knowledge and expertise of victim-survivors,
advocates, service providers and researchers to inform and guide the National Plan. The Government is
grateful for the tireless efforts of many, to keep violence against women part of the national
conversation. Their advocacy has shone a light into the shadows and has given governments across
Australia the drive and profound sense of responsibility to continue driving change.
5
Table of Contents
Acknowledgement of Country ................................................................................................................... 2
House Committee Report .......................................................................................................................... 2
Help and Support ....................................................................................................................................... 4
Introduction ............................................................................................................................................... 5
Summary of Government Response to Recommendations ....................................................................... 7
Abbreviations .......................................................................................................................................... 21
Australian Government Response to Recommendations......................................................................... 25
Family violence in Australia and the National Plan ........................................................................... 25
Governance, coordination and evaluation .......................................................................................... 34
Non-physical forms of violence ........................................................................................................... 39
Violence in diverse communities ......................................................................................................... 57
Primary prevention .............................................................................................................................. 77
Early intervention and behaviour change ........................................................................................... 81
Responses to assist victim-survivors .................................................................................................... 90
Notes ...................................................................................................................................................... 100
6
Summary of Government Response to Recommendations
Recommendation Response
Recommendation 1 Supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with state
and territory governments to adopt a uniform definition of family, domestic and
sexual violence, which:
• reflects a common understanding of the features and dynamics of such
violence and the breadth of relationships in which violence can occur;
• encompasses a broad range of violence, including but not limited to
coercive control, reproductive coercion, economic abuse, and complex
forms of violence, such as forced marriage, female genital
mutilation/cutting and dowry abuse; and
• recognises the diversity of victim-survivors and perpetrators and the
particular vulnerability of certain groups.
Recommendation 2 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan include quantitative principle
measures, which should be agreed following consultation with non-government
organisations, experts, and victim-survivors. The Committee proposes the
following measures for consideration:
• reduction in the number of deaths attributed to family, domestic and
sexual violence;
• reduction in the rate of incidents of family, domestic and sexual
violence;
• reduction in the rate of re-offending by perpetrators;
• reduction in the rate of family, domestic and sexual violence in diverse
communities, including Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people;
LGBTQI people; culturally and linguistically diverse people; and
people with disability;
• increase in the availability and quality of support services for victim-
survivors;
• significant and long-term increase in the number of perpetrators
attending and completing perpetrator behaviour change programs;
• reduction in the number of incidents of family, domestic and sexual
violence involving alcohol and/or other drugs;
• reduction in the number of incidents of family, domestic and sexual
violence involving children as either victim-survivors or perpetrators;
• reduction in the number of incidents of family, domestic and sexual
violence involving elder abuse, whether within the aged care system or
in the home;
• increase in the reporting rate of incidents of family, domestic and
sexual violence; and
• significant improvement in community awareness and understanding
of, and attitudes about, all forms of family, domestic and sexual
violence.
Recommendation 3 Supported
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan be inclusive of the
diversity of victim-survivors. In particular, the next National Plan should
recognise the rights and needs of:
• women;
• children in their own right;
• men;
• older Australians;
• LGBTQI people; and
7
Recommendation Response
• people living with a disability.
Further, the Committee recommends that the Australian Government, and
state and territory governments, ensure that the next National Plan and the
National Framework for Protecting Australia’s Children 2009-2020 are clearly
aligned.
Recommendation 4 Supported
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan seek to prevent all
forms of family, domestic and sexual violence, including physical violence,
sexual violence, exposure to violence in childhood, repeated violence,
nonphysical forms of violence including coercive control and technology-
facilitated abuse, and complex forms of violence such as forced marriage,
female genital mutilation/cutting and dowry abuse.
Recommendation 5 Not supported
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan be named the
‘National plan to reduce family, domestic and sexual violence’.
Recommendation 6 Supported
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan promote and enhance
an integrated whole-of-service-system response to family, domestic and sexual
violence across jurisdictions.
Recommendation 7 Supported
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan promote and enhance
a whole-of-society response to family, domestic and sexual violence that
involves businesses, community groups and other non-government bodies, as
well as governments.
Recommendation 8 Supported
The Committee recommends that responsibility for the implementation of the
next National Plan continue to rest with the Department of Social Services.
Recommendation 9 Not supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government direct and
appropriately resource the Australian Bureau of Statistics to conduct the
Personal Safety Survey on an annual basis and ensure that the survey collects
information about the prevalence of specific forms of family, domestic and
sexual violence and complex forms of violence.
Recommendation 10 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government direct and principle
appropriately resource the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare to
develop a national data collection on service-system contacts with victim-
survivors and perpetrators, including data from primary health care, ambulance,
emergency department, police, justice, and legal services.
Further, the Committee recommends that the Australian Government, and state
and territory governments, provide appropriate funding and support to service
providers to implement consistent data collection procedures.
Recommendation 11 Supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government direct and
appropriately resource the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare to
develop a national data collection on the use of, and unmet demand for,
specialist family, domestic and sexual violence services.
Recommendation 12 Supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government lead the
development of a national family, domestic and sexual violence death toll.
Further, the Committee recommends the Australian Government consider the
need for additional measures to ensure better integration of data from family,
domestic and sexual violence death reviews across all Australian jurisdictions.
Recommendation 13 Supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, and state and
8
Recommendation Response
territory governments, continue to provide increased funding for frontline
family, domestic and sexual violence services in the COVID-19 pandemic.
Recommendation 14 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan include measures principle
informed by the experience of family, domestic and sexual violence in the
COVID-19 pandemic, including but not limited to:
• integration of family, domestic and sexual violence in emergency
planning and disaster response frameworks;
• increased support for the health and welfare of frontline workers, at all
times but particularly during emergencies and disasters; and
• increased use of technology and new service delivery models to
improve access to services.
Recommendation 15 Noted
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government seek the
agreement of state and territory governments to make a representative of the
Australian Local Government Association a member of the National Federation
Reform Council Taskforce on Women’s Safety.
Recommendation 16 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and principle
territory governments directly involve local government in the development
and implementation of the next National Plan. If not achieved through the
Australian Local Government Association’s (ALGA) membership on the
National Federation Reform Council Taskforce on Women’s Safety, another
appropriate mechanism should be utilised to facilitate ALGA’s engagement.
Recommendation 17 Noted
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and each state
and territory government co-fund on a 50-50 basis a dedicated family and
domestic violence policy officer in each state and territory local government
association for an initial period of five years.
In addition, the Australian Government and state and territory governments
should work with the Australian Local Government Association to consider
whether additional resources are required to assist individual local governments
to have a more active role in preventing and responding to family, domestic
and sexual violence, and to implement the Prevention toolkit for local
government.
Recommendation 18 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan include a commitment principle
to improve the transparency of funding for family, domestic and sexual
violence programs and services.
The Committee further recommends that Australian Government funding
provided to state and territory governments for family, domestic and sexual
violence programs and services be linked to requirements that those
governments:
• fund related programs and services within their own jurisdictions
on an agreed minimum ratio basis of the funding provided by the
Australian Government; and
• report regularly on their own funding for related programs and
services.
Recommendation 19 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in consultation principle
with state and territory governments, develop a needs-based funding
methodology to account for variations in the presentation of family, domestic
and sexual violence in different jurisdictions.
This methodology should be applied to future Australian Government and state
9
Recommendation Response
and territory governments’ funding for family, domestic and sexual violence
programs.
Recommendation 20 Supported
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan include a commitment
to an ongoing program of independent and transparent monitoring and
evaluation, which:
• includes formal opportunities for victim-survivors and other
nongovernment stakeholders to provide input; and
• is overseen by the proposed National Commissioner for the
prevention of family, domestic and sexual violence, or another
independent body.
Recommendation 21 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan include a commitment principle
to provide funding for Australia's National Research Organisation for Women's
Safety for the life of the plan.
Recommendation 22 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government ensure that principle
specific family, domestic and sexual violence programs funded either directly
or indirectly by the Australian Government include funding for a standardised
evaluation component. Evaluations should be published where possible.
Further, the Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in
consultation with state and territory governments, consider the need for:
• the development of accredited standards or agreed outcomes
measures to guide evaluations of family, domestic and sexual
violence programs and services;
• additional support and training to assist organisations in
undertaking evaluations; and
• a national platform for the publication of evaluations.
Recommendation 23 Supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government establish as an
independent statutory office a National Commissioner for the prevention of
family, domestic and sexual violence.
The functions of the Commissioner should include promoting and enhancing a
whole-of-government, cross-jurisdictional approach to policy development,
research, data collection, and monitoring and evaluation with respect to family,
domestic and sexual violence initiatives.
The Commissioner should:
• report to the Minister for Social Services;
• be an ex officio observer on the National Federation Reform
Council Taskforce on Women’s Safety;
• be responsible for monitoring and evaluation of the next National
Plan;
• provide a formal mechanism for consultation with victim-survivors
and non-government organisations; and
• provide an annual report to the Parliament.
The Commissioner should be provided with appropriate resources to perform
its functions for the duration of the next National Plan.
Recommendation 24 Supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and
territory governments develop shared principles to guide any future offences of
coercive and controlling behaviour, with a view to ensuring consistency across
jurisdictions to the extent possible.
These principles should address:
10
Recommendation Response
• the behaviours and patterns of behaviour captured by any new
offences;
• the breadth of relationships captured by any new offences;
• the standard of proof required by any new offences;
• mitigating the impact of any new offences on groups with
particular vulnerabilities; and
• associated implementation issues, including but not limited to
minimum standards for training in any new offences; and, very
importantly, public awareness raising about any new offences.
Recommendation 25 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government fund a specific principle
public awareness campaign about coercive and controlling behaviour as a form
of family, domestic and sexual violence and a predictor of severe physical
violence and homicide.
Recommendation 26 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, and state and principle
territory governments, develop and provide funding for training for the
identification of coercive and controlling behaviour for police; justice and legal
sector practitioners; and health, mental health, social services, and specialist
family, domestic and sexual violence service workers.
The Committee further recommends that the Australian Government and state
and territory governments consider developing minimum standards for training
on coercive control and including training on coercive control in relevant
professional qualifications.
Recommendation 27 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and principle
territory governments undertake a review of relevant risk identification, risk
assessment, and risk management practices to ensure that coercive and
controlling behaviour is adequately captured.
Recommendation 28 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government continue funding principle
for critical research around the context, motives and outcomes of technology-
facilitated abuse—in particular, by providing dedicated funding to the Office of
the eSafety Commissioner and Australia’s National Research Organisation for
Women’s Safety.
Recommendation 29 Supported in
Based on recommendations from the eSafety Commissioner, the Committee principle
recommends that the Australian Government, in cooperation with state and
territory governments where applicable:
• Develop and implement education initiatives that drive cultural
change and increase awareness about the abusive nature and legal
implications of technology-facilitated abuse, focused on women
and girls at risk of experiencing technology-facilitated abuse and
men and boys at risk of perpetrating it.
• Through a process of co-design, work with at-risk communities to
develop resources to raise their awareness of technology-facilitated
abuse and their capacity to identify and manage it.
• Develop resources for children and young people to help them
understand and manage the ways that technology is used in family,
domestic and sexual violence.
• Develop and implement capacity building initiatives to increase all
women’s and girls’ skills in online safety and digital literacy.
11
Recommendation Response
• Embed comprehensive and nationally coordinated respectful
relationships and online safety education into the Australian
curriculum across all learning stages.
• Facilitate more gender-balanced science, technology, engineering
and maths (STEM) industries by developing initiatives to upskill
and reskill women for entry opportunities and leadership pathways
in STEM.
• Ensure Australia is represented on, and contributes to, global
initiatives and coalitions to advance the rights of women and girls
and uphold and deliver on international agreements, including in
relation to technology-facilitated abuse, the potential for
technology to drive gender equality, and Safety by Design.
• Ensure that capacity building initiatives to increase women’s skills
in online safety and digital literacy occur both in Australia and in
our region.
• Ensure government support and funding for Safety by Design and
encourage industry players to implement and champion its
principles, to promote a safer online environment for women and
girls.
• Fund the eSafety Women program on an ongoing basis.
• Expand the eSafety Women program to deliver education and
training to the judiciary, legal profession, and law enforcement.
• Establish a new program to provide training for frontline workers
and others about how children are involved in technology-
facilitated abuse cases involving their parents.
• Fund eSafety to evaluate and advise on technical solutions to
protect victim-survivors experiencing technology-facilitated abuse.
• Provide dedicated funding for Safety by Design to assist in
increasing its adoption and impact.
• Develop an education and awareness campaign on dating
applications.
Recommendation 30 Noted
The Committee makes the additional following recommendations relating to
technology-facilitated abuse:
• There should be greater acknowledgement that appropriate
technology use is a shared community responsibility. It is not
simply a responsibility of platforms to host and police content.
• There should be greater clarity around a platform’s obligation to
remove content, including through the Online Safety Act.
• In order to open or maintain an existing social media account,
customers should be required by law to identify themselves to a
platform using 100 points of identification, in the same way as a
person must provide identification for a mobile phone account, or
to buy a mobile SIM card.
• Social media platforms must provide those identifying details
when requested by the eSafety Commissioner, law enforcement or
as directed by a court.
• The Government should consider regulating to enable law
enforcement agencies to access a platform’s end-to-end encrypted
data, by warrant, in matters involving a threat to the physical or
mental wellbeing of an individual or in cases of national security.
• There should be a substantial increase in criminal and civil
penalties for technology-facilitated abuse to act as a greater
deterrent for errant behaviour.
12
Recommendation Response
• All government hosted websites and applications should have
readily available (and searchable) avenues where a victim-survivor
of technology-facilitated abuse can seek assistance to have abusive
material removed expeditiously.
Recommendation 31 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan provide funding for principle
programs, including in schools, to improve the financial literacy and reduce the
financial abuse of women.
Recommendation 32 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with the principle
states and territories (other than Victoria) to provide funding for an increased
number of financial counsellors.
Recommendation 33 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Attorney-General take the following principle
measures to enable the identification of financial information and facilitate
superannuation splitting:
• develop an administrative mechanism to enable swift identification
of financial information, including superannuation, by parties to
family law proceedings or victim-survivors of family, domestic or
sexual violence; and
• amend the Family Law Act 1975 and relevant regulations to reduce
the procedural and substantive complexity associated with
superannuation splitting orders, including by simplifying forms
required to be submitted to superannuation funds.
Recommendation 34 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, and state and principle
territory governments, provide support for research and community awareness
raising on the harmful practice of female genital mutilation/cutting, including
by providing ongoing funding for the National Education Toolkit for Female
Genital Mutilation/Cutting Awareness.
Recommendation 35 Supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government fund research
into the prevalence and impact of family, domestic and sexual violence on
children and young people, including:
• during the first one thousand days after birth; and
• from infancy to adolescence.
Recommendation 36 Supported
The Committee recommends that, in accordance with National Priority Two of
the Fourth Action Plan, any family, domestic and sexual violence policies,
programs and legislative frameworks which affect Indigenous Australians must
be co-designed by Indigenous peoples along with government. Similarly, the
evaluation of such policies, programs and legislative frameworks must be
appropriately funded and be designed with and led by Indigenous Australians
working with government.
Recommendation 37 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and principle
territory governments work to ensure the provision of appropriate funding for
culturally specific Indigenous awareness programs for all stakeholders in
government, including police, service providers and the judiciary; to enable an
improved understanding of the particular challenges faced by Indigenous
Australians affected by family, domestic and sexual violence. This should
include the options available to them for referral to Aboriginal Community
Controlled Organisations, whether they be victim-survivors or perpetrators.
Recommendation 38 Supported
13
Recommendation Response
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and
territory governments provide additional training to police, General
Practitioners, child health nurses, Remote Area Clinic nurses and any other
service providers that have contact with people in rural and remote areas to
assist in the early identification of family, domestic and sexual violence.
Service personnel working in Indigenous communities should receive
appropriate Indigenous culturally aware training.
Recommendation 39 Supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and
territory governments explore opportunities to use technology to provide more
services for victim-survivors and perpetrators in regional, rural and remote
areas.
Recommendation 40 Supported in
The Committee recommends that, to improve data relevant to LGBTQI principle
communities, the Australian Government:
• develop guidelines for data collection about sexuality and gender
as it relates to experiences of violence, as part of government-
funded research and service provision;
• include a question about LGBTQI identification in future
Commonwealth censuses; and
• fund a national research project to examine the impact of family,
domestic and sexual violence affecting the LGBTQI community,
and review best practice models to inform appropriate responses.
Recommendation 41 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in cooperation principle
with the states and territories, develop and implement nationally consistent,
regular and targeted education and training within mainstream services,
including police and paramedics, in relation to the nature, features and
dynamics of intimate partner violence and its particular impact on those from
LGBTQI communities.
Recommendation 42 Supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government provide funding
for Our Watch to update its Change the Story framework to be inclusive, and to
develop an LGBTQI specific prevention guide, highlighting how gendered
violence impacts LGBTQI communities in different ways compared to the
broader community
Recommendation 43 Supported
The Committee recommends that policies and programs relating to family,
domestic and sexual violence as it affects LGBTQI communities be developed
in partnership between government agencies and LGBTQI organisations.
Recommendation 44 Supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government ensure that the
next National Plan specifies people living with disability as a priority cohort, to
ensure that legislation, policies and programs (across all jurisdictions) include
consultation to support specific consideration of the impacts on, and needs of,
these members of the community.
Recommendation 45 Noted
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, together with the
states and territories, develop a national strategy, in consultation with people
living with disability and their representative organisations, to improve access
to comprehensive, equitable, accessible, and disability-inclusive sexual and
reproductive health education and information.
Recommendation 46 Supported in
The Committee recommends that National Disability Insurance Agency staff principle
(including planners and those with decision making delegation) and disability
14
Recommendation Response
service workers funded by the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS)
complete mandatory training in identifying and responding to family, domestic
and sexual violence affecting people with disability.
Recommendation 47 Supported in
The Committee recommends that, to support the implementation of the above principle
recommendations, the Australian Government, in cooperation with the states
and territories, implement national uniform legislation establishing mandatory
reporting by registered disability service providers to police and the proposed
National Commissioner for the prevention of family, domestic and sexual
violence of all incidents of violence perpetrated against people living with
disability, whether in residential care facilities or people’s own homes.
Recommendation 48 Supported
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan be more inclusive of
people from culturally and linguistically diverse communities, their
experiences and their needs.
Recommendation 49 Supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government focus on
providing more, and more effective, culturally appropriate education on family,
domestic and sexual violence to culturally and linguistically diverse
communities.
Recommendation 50 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, and state and principle
territory governments, provide a specifically funded resource to assist larger
multicultural organisations to enhance family, domestic and sexual violence
service delivery for culturally and linguistically diverse communities.
Recommendation 51 Noted
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and, where
applicable, state and territory governments, make the following changes to
immigration legislation and procedures:
• amend the Migration Act 1958 to prevent ‘consequential visa
cancellation’ where a victim-survivor of family violence has their
visa cancelled due to domestic violence perpetrated against them
by the primary visa holder;
• where a visa applicant is in crisis or temporary accommodation,
create an exception to the requirement that a residential address is
required to lodge a valid protection visa application;
• address official correspondence related to visa applications to each
individual applicant, so that if one of them leaves the family home,
the correspondence can then be re-directed to a new address;
• provide access to legal services, specialist police services and
income support for a broader range of temporary visa holders who
are victim-survivors of family violence, and consider revisions to
migration regulations to offer legal protection to victim-survivors
on temporary visas;
• broaden the definition of family violence in the Migration
Regulations 1994 to be consistent with the Family Violence
Protection Act 2008 (Vic) and to ensure that people seeking to
escape violence are entitled to crisis payments, regardless of their
visa status;
• exempt women on temporary visas and women seeking asylum
who have experienced family and domestic violence from meeting
residency requirements for the purposes of access to Centrelink
and Medicare while their visa is being processed; and
15
Recommendation Response
• review and amend the eligibility requirements for victim-survivors
of violence to access financial and other crisis supports,
particularly for those on temporary visas.
Recommendation 52 Noted
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan provide funding to
investigate the prevalence and prevention of elder abuse, both in residential
care facilities and in people’s own homes, whether by facility staff, carers or
family members.
Recommendation 53 Noted
The Committee recommends that the Department of Health release all de-
identified data and information pertaining to incidents and allegations of sexual
assault in residential aged care, including incidents where the perpetrator was
alleged to have had a cognitive or mental impairment.
Recommendation 54 Supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government commission
research into the prevalence of family, domestic and sexual violence against
men and its impact on male victim-survivors. The research should include a
focus on any connections between male victim-survivors and their exposure to
family, domestic and sexual violence as children.
The Committee further recommends that the Department of Social Services
review the adequacy of advice and referral services for men as victim-survivors
of family, domestic and sexual violence.
Recommendation 55 Supported
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan continue with the core
philosophy of primary prevention being key to reducing family, domestic and
sexual violence.
Recommendation 56 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, with state and principle
territory governments, provide increased funding for developmentally
appropriate primary prevention campaigns, including protective behaviour
education, to inform respectful attitudes around sexual consent, with an
emphasis on community education, particularly young people in schools. This
should include funding for Our Watch for the entire life of the next National
Plan, so as to provide the organisation with greater certainty and program
continuity.
Recommendation 57 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government support national principle
research and awareness raising campaigns into sexist advertising and the
negative effects of unequal gender representation.
Recommendation 58 Supported
Recognising that the principal drivers of family, domestic and sexual violence
are gender inequality and stereotypical attitudes towards gender roles,
characteristics and behaviour, together with disrespect of girls and women, the
Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider establishing
a gender equality strategy.
Recommendation 59 Supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with the
states and territories to ensure that age-appropriate respectful relationships are
taught in all Australian schools and early education settings.
Recommendation 60 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan adopt a public health principle
approach to preventing and managing drug and alcohol related harms
experienced by families and children, involving all jurisdictions, including
local governments.
Recommendation 61 Supported
16
Recommendation Response
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan include measures to
support the social services sector (including the health, mental health,
disability, family and relationships, and alcohol and other drugs sectors) to
have a greater role in identifying and responding to family, domestic and
sexual violence.
These measures should include but not be limited to:
• training for all staff in identifying family, domestic and sexual
violence and working with perpetrators;
• measures to support increased information sharing about
perpetrators; and
• measures to support a more consistent national approach to risk
assessment and risk management.
Recommendation 62 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan include measures to principle
leverage the existing network of Primary Health Networks to improve the
identification and response to family, domestic and sexual violence in general
practices. These should include consideration of a national rollout of the
Recognise, Respond, Refer program, subject to a positive evaluation of the
current trial.
Recommendation 63 Supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government provide
additional funding to No to Violence to support the national operation of the
Men’s Referral Service for a further three years.
Recommendation 64 Noted
The Committee recommends that the Department of Social Services review the
adequacy of referral services for perpetrators of family, domestic and sexual
violence. The review should give consideration to the need for greater
consistency across jurisdictions and the establishment of a single nationally
coordinated intake point for perpetrators seeking behavioural change.
Recommendation 65 Supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and
territory governments provide additional dedicated funding for perpetrator
behaviour change programs.
This should include funding to trial new perpetrator intervention models, and
specialised perpetrator behaviour change programs for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people, people from culturally and linguistically diverse
backgrounds, people with mental illness, people with disability, adolescents,
people of diverse sexuality and gender, and women.
Funded programs should be integrated with specialist family and domestic
violence and other services, and should include an evaluation component
consistent with the proposed national outcomes framework, which will
contribute to building the evidence base on perpetrator interventions.
This funding should not be delivered through reductions in funding to services
for victim-survivors.
Recommendation 66 Supported in
To support an increase in the number or perpetrators attending and completing principle
behaviour change programs, the Committee recommends that:
• the Australian Government and state and territory governments
establish a centralised online register of perpetrator intervention
programs; and
• state and territory governments provide funding for perpetrator
court support workers to enable offenders to be referred to
appropriate behaviour change programs and other support services.
Recommendation 67 Supported
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan include measures to
17
Recommendation Response
support increased use of technology in delivering perpetrator behaviour change
programs, where it is safe to do so. These measures should aim to support
programs including but not limited to:
• programs for specific cohorts in sparsely populated regional, rural
and remote areas who would not otherwise have access to
specialised programs; and
• alternatives to group-based programs for perpetrators for whom
such programs are not appropriate.
Recommendation 68 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and principle
territory governments provide dedicated funding to perpetrator behaviour
change program providers and specialist family and domestic violence services
to deliver support services for partners, ex-partners, children, and other family
members of perpetrators enrolled in perpetrator behaviour change programs.
Recommendation 69 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Department of Social Services lead the principle
development of a national outcomes framework for evidence-based perpetrator
behaviour change programs.
Recommendation 70 Partially supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, working with
states and territories where appropriate, provide funding for research on the
backgrounds, characteristics, and recidivism rates of perpetrators of family
violence with a view to informing future policy and practice in relation to
perpetrator interventions. This should include research on adolescents, women,
and children who perpetrate violence against their parents, as well as men.
The Committee further recommends that the Australian Government consider
the development of an annual national, population level survey on the
perpetration of family violence.
Recommendation 71 Noted
The Committee recommends that state and territory governments work with
local community-based organisations to design and implement place-based
models of justice reinvestment, similar to that used in the Maranguka Justice
Reinvestment Project, as a matter of priority across Australia.
Recommendation 72 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and principle
territory governments commit to increasing the overall baseline funding for
specialist family and domestic violence service providers.
Recommendation 73 Supported in
The Committee recognises the importance of the provision and availability of principle
supportive housing models to assist victim-survivors of family, domestic and
sexual violence to find safety for themselves and their children. The Committee
recommends that the Australian Government and state and territory
governments collaborate to identify programs that could be implemented across
the country, and ensure that specialist and ‘wrap-around’ support services have
access to dedicated, long-term funding.
Recommendation 74 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and principle
territory governments collaborate in the provision of affordable housing
solutions in Australia to meet long-term needs for those made homeless by
family, domestic and sexual violence, and to address the backlog of victim-
survivors who cannot access affordable housing.
Recommendation 75 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and principle
territory governments:
18
Recommendation Response
• consider implementing policies to remove perpetrators rather than
victim-survivors in cases of family, domestic and sexual violence,
where this can be achieved without threat to the safety of victim-
survivors; and
• consider funding for emergency accommodation for perpetrators to
prevent victim-survivors being forced to flee their homes or
continue residing in a violent home.
Recommendation 76 Supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in conjunction
with state and territory governments, resource additional research regarding the
intersection between mental health and family, domestic and sexual violence.
There should be a particular focus on the lived experiences of victim-survivors
and the children of victim-survivors who have experienced both family
violence and mental health issues.
Recommendation 77 Supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in partnership
with the New South Wales Government, fund a trial program of the Illawarra
Women’s Health Centre’s Women’s Trauma Recovery Centre. This funding
could be part of a pilot program over a five-year period with a view, subject to
positive evaluation, to rolling out similar services around the country.
Recommendation 78 Noted
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and
territory governments provide additional funding on a 50-50 basis to
community legal centres for a minimum of five years to assist victim-survivors
of family, domestic and sexual violence. Such funding should be tied to
appropriate reporting mechanisms and performance indicators, including but
not limited to the full disclosure of funding provided to community legal
centres by the states and territories.
Recommendation 79 Noted
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and
territory governments provide funding on a 50-50 basis to legal aid
commissions and community legal centres to engage more social workers
experienced in family violence, child protection and family law matters.
Recommendation 80 Supported in
The Committee recommends that, subject to positive evaluation of the Legal principle
Aid Commission Small Claims Property Trials, the Australian Government
along with states and territory governments fund on a 50-50 basis the
establishment of a small property mediation program.
Recommendation 81 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in collaboration principle
with state and territory governments, implement a national electronic database
of domestic violence orders to support the National Domestic Violence Order
Scheme. The database should include provisional, interim, and final domestic
violence orders and should record breaches of orders.
In addition, the Australian Government should:
• work with state and territory governments to develop standardised
training material to be delivered to relevant staff alongside the
introduction of the database; and
• consider whether the database should be accessible by specialist
family and domestic violence service providers in addition to
courts and police.
Recommendation 82 Noted
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in consultation
with state and territory governments, expand the National Domestic Violence
Order Scheme to include orders issued under the Family Law Act 1975 and
19
Recommendation Response
orders issued under state and territory child protection legislation.
Recommendation 83 Supported in
The Committee recommends that the Department of Social Services principle
commission research on the potential benefits and risks to victim-survivor
safety of the establishment of a publicly accessible register of convicted family,
domestic and sexual violence offenders.
Recommendation 84 Noted
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with the
states and territories to adopt a variant of the United Kingdom’s ‘Silent
Solution’ for silent calls for police assistance.
Recommendation 85 Noted
The Committee recommends that the states and territories increase criminal
penalties for breaches of apprehended or domestic violence orders, and ensure
that the judiciary receives further training about the importance of security to
victim-survivors of family, domestic and sexual violence and their families.
Recommendation 86 Supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and
territory governments jointly develop a mechanism to provide resources to
victim-survivors to assist them to leave their home and resettle to escape a
violent relationship. This should include examining ways in which the
Commonwealth may recover the costs from the perpetrator.
Recommendation 87 Supported
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in conjunction
with state and territory governments, ensure that the next National Plan
recognises that family, domestic and sexual violence impacts upon workplaces.
Recommendation 88 Supported
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan include greater
emphasis and specific detail on the crucial role of work and economic equality
in the advancement of gender equality and the prevention of family, domestic
and sexual violence.
20
Abbreviations
Abbreviation Definition
AANA Australian Association of National Advertisers
ABS Australian Bureau of Statistics
ACMS Australian Child Maltreatment Study
ACQS Commission Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission
Advisory Council Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Advisory Council on family,
domestic and sexual violence
AFP Australian Federal Police
AGD Attorney-General’s Department
AIC Australian Institute of Criminology
AIFS Australian Institute of Family Studies
AIHW Australian Institute of Health and Welfare
AIJA Australasian Institute of Judicial Administration
ALGA Australian Local Government Association
ANROWS Australia’s National Research Organisation for Women’s Safety
ATO Australian Taxation Office
Bench Book National Domestic and Family Violence Bench Book
CCTCP Cyber and Critical Tech Cooperation Program
Closing the Gap National Agreement on Closing the Gap
COAG Coalition of Australian Governments
COVID-19 National National Partnership on COVID-19 Domestic and Family Violence
Partnership Responses
DFAT Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
DFSV Commission Domestic, Family and Sexual Violence Commission
Disability Royal Royal Commission into Violence, Abuse, Neglect and Exploitation
Commission of People with Disability
DSS Department of Social Services
DVU Domestic Violence Unit
EVP Escaping Violence Payment
21
eSafety eSafety Commissioner
FASS Family Advocacy and Support Services
FDSV Family, domestic and sexual violence
FDSV National National Partnership on Family, Domestic and Sexual Violence
Partnership Responses
FGM/C Female genital mutilation/cutting
First Nations National First Nations National Plan for family safety
Plan
Former National Plan National Plan to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children
2010-2022
FVitC Family Violence in the Court
GEDSI Gender equality, disability and social inclusion
GP General Practitioner
HJP Health Justice Partnerships
ICT Information and Communications Technology
Inclusion Round Safe Places Inclusion Round
KWSITH Keeping Women Safe in their Homes Program
LAC Trial Lawyer-assisted Family Law Property Mediation: Legal Aid
Commission Trial
LGBTIQA+ Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Intersex, Queer/Questioning,
Asexual
LHA LGBTIQ+ Health Australia
MatCH Australian Longitudinal Study on Women’s Health – Mothers and
their Children’s Health
MCWH Multicultural Centre for Women’s Health
Migration Act Migration Act 1958
Migration Regulations Migration Regulations 1994
National Plan National Plan to End Violence against Women and Children 2022-
2032
National Framework National Strategic Framework for Information Sharing between the
Family Law and Family Violence and Child Protection system
National Principles National Principles to Address Coercive Control
22
National Strategy National Strategy to Achieve Gender Equality
NCIS National Criminal Intelligence System
NDIA National Disability Insurance Agency
NDIS National Disability Insurance Scheme
NDIS Commission NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission
NDIS Framework NDIS Quality and Safeguarding Framework
NDVOS National Domestic Violence Order Scheme
NETFA National Education Toolkit for Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting
Awareness
NHHA National Housing and Homelessness Agreement
NHMP National Homicide Monitoring Program
NIAA National Indigenous Australians Agency
NJCA National Judicial College of Australia
NLAP National Legal Assistance Partnership
NOSPI National Outcome Standards for Perpetrator Interventions
NPAG National Plan Advisory Group
Online Safety Act Online Safety Act 2021
PHN Primary Health Network
PSS Personal Safety Survey
Respect@Work report Respect@Work: Sexual Harassment National Inquiry Report (2020)
RRR Recognise, Respond, Refer Program
Safe Places Safe Places Emergency Accommodation Program
SFVS Specialised Family Violence Services
SIRS Serious Incident Response Scheme
STEM Science, technology, engineering and mathematics
ToRs Terms of Reference
Transitional Act Online Safety (Transitional Provisions and Consequential
Amendments) Act 2021
UN United Nations
23
UNFPA United Nations Population Fund
VAWC Violence against Women and Children
VET Vocational Education and Training
WLDP Women’s Leadership and Development Program
WWSMC Women and Women’s Safety Ministerial Council
24
Australian Government Response to Recommendations
Family violence in Australia and the National Plan
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with state and territory governments
to adopt a uniform definition of family, domestic and sexual violence, which:
• reflects a common understanding of the features and dynamics of such violence and the breadth
of relationships in which violence can occur;
• encompasses a broad range of violence, including but not limited to coercive control,
reproductive coercion, economic abuse, and complex forms of violence, such as forced marriage, female
genital mutilation/cutting and dowry abuse; and
• recognises the diversity of victim-survivors and perpetrators and the particular vulnerability of
certain groups.
Supported
The definitions used in the National Plan to End Violence against Women and Children 2022-2032
(National Plan) reflect what has been learned so far, acknowledging that learning will continue over the
life of the National Plan. Definitions of family and domestic violence currently vary across
jurisdictions. A shared understanding will improve identification of family and domestic violence and
our ability to prevent violence and protect victim-survivors. It will also improve data collection which
is key to directing government resources and the development of policies and initiatives to keep women
and children safe. Additionally, a national definition will improve understanding of family and
domestic violence across communities. The Government has committed to develop a national definition
that includes coercive control, in close partnership with the states and territories.
A national definition of family and domestic violence will support the effective enforceability of
protections under the National Domestic Violence Order Scheme (NDVOS), and assist the Government
in applying the powers of the Migration Act 1958 (Migration Act) against perpetrators consistently
across Australian jurisdictions.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan include quantitative measures, which should be
agreed following consultation with non-government organisations, experts, and victim-survivors. The
Committee proposes the following measures for consideration:
• reduction in the number of deaths attributed to family, domestic and sexual violence;
• reduction in the rate of incidents of family, domestic and sexual violence;
• reduction in the rate of re-offending by perpetrators;
• reduction in the rate of family, domestic and sexual violence in diverse communities, including
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people; LGBTQI people; culturally and linguistically diverse
people; and people with disability;
25
• increase in the availability and quality of support services for victim-survivors;
• significant and long-term increase in the number of perpetrators attending and completing
perpetrator behaviour change programs;
• reduction in the number of incidents of family, domestic and sexual violence involving alcohol
and/or other drugs;
• reduction in the number of incidents of family, domestic and sexual violence involving children
as either victim-survivors or perpetrators;
• reduction in the number of incidents of family, domestic and sexual violence involving elder
abuse, whether within the aged care system or in the home;
• increase in the reporting rate of incidents of family, domestic and sexual violence; and
• significant improvement in community awareness and understanding of, and attitudes about, all
forms of family, domestic and sexual violence.
Supported in principle
The vision of the National Plan is to end violence against women and children in one generation.
To ensure accountability, the Government has committed to including targets under the National Plan
to demonstrate progress over time towards ending gender-based violence.
The National Plan will be supported by an Outcomes Framework to measure progress. This Framework
is currently under development in consultation with key stakeholders, including state and territory
governments. This Framework will identify outcomes and indicators to measure progress against the
objectives of the National Plan. These measures will go beyond prevalence indicators and will aim to
measure real change towards ending gender-based violence.
The Domestic, Family and Sexual Violence Commission (DFSV Commission) will provide
independent reporting on progress against the National Plan to ensure it delivers real and tangible
actions. The DFSV Commission will hold all levels of governments to account through a yearly report
to Parliament.
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan be inclusive of the diversity of victim-survivors.
In particular, the next National Plan should recognise the rights and needs of:
• women;
• children in their own right;
• men;
• older Australians;
• LGBTQI people; and
• people living with a disability.
26
Further, the Committee recommends that the Australian Government, and state and territory
governments, ensure that the next National Plan and the National Framework for Protecting Australia’s
Children 2009-2020 are clearly aligned.
Supported
The National Plan reflects the diversity of Australian society and recognises while violence affects all
groups in society, it affects each group, including children, older women, the LGBTIQA+ community,
culturally and linguistically diverse communities, women with disability and Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander communities in different ways.
The National Plan recognises children as victims in their own right, and that childhood experiences of
violence can have long-term and ongoing impacts, including physical and mental health impacts among
others. The National Plan identifies actions to prevent and address violence against children in each of
the four domains, from prevention through to recovery and healing. To support these actions, the
National Plan is clearly aligned with two key initiatives that aim to improve outcomes for children:
• Safe and Supported: the National Framework for Protecting Australia’s Children 2021-2031
(Safe and Supported), the successor plan to the National Framework for Protecting Australia’s
Children 2009-2020; and
• National Strategy to Prevent and Respond to Child Sexual Abuse 2021-2030.
Intersectionality is included as a cross-cutting principle underpinning all objectives outlined in the
National Plan. This ensures the National Plan considers the rights and needs of all people who
experience gender-based violence.
Further, the National Plan also includes person-centred coordination and integration as a cross-cutting
principle, recognising the need for a service system that is timely, safe, inclusive, tailored and
accessible, and delivers integrated specialised services for victim-survivors.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan seek to prevent all forms of family, domestic
and sexual violence, including physical violence, sexual violence, exposure to violence in childhood,
repeated violence, nonphysical forms of violence including coercive control and technology-facilitated
abuse, and complex forms of violence such as forced marriage, female genital mutilation/cutting and
dowry abuse.
Supported
The National Plan addresses and seeks to prevent all forms of FDSV experienced by all groups of
people, including children, older women, the LGBTIQA+ community, Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander communities, culturally and linguistically diverse communities and women with disability.
The National Plan outlines several key areas of focus for addressing gender-based violence in Australia
including, coercive control, intimate partner homicide, sexual violence and harassment, pornography,
economic abuse, including financial abuse, and technology-facilitated abuse. However, the National
Plan also recognises other forms of violence, including childhood exposure to violence, forced
marriage, female genital mutilation/cutting (FGM/C) and dowry abuse, and seeks to address these
forms of violence as well through targeted prevention and early intervention strategies.
27
Safe and Supported seeks to reduce the rate of child abuse and neglect and its intergenerational impacts.
This includes emotional abuse, which was the most common primary type of abuse or neglect
substantiated through investigations in 2020–21. Children affected by exposure to family violence are
included in this category.
Safe and Supported will align and interact with other national initiatives to support systemic change for
children, young people and families. Most importantly, it will have close linkages with the National
Plan, recognising that the 2 issues are closely intertwined at all levels.
Safe and Supported will be implemented through two sets of Action Plans, including Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander-specific Action Plans. The first two Action Plans were released in January 2023.
The Government has implemented strategies to address specific forms of violence, such as coercive
control and forced marriage. The Commonwealth, state and territory governments are co-designing the
National Principles to Address Coercive Control (National Principles). The National Principles aim to
develop a common understanding of coercive control and to raise awareness of the issue. They also aim
to ensure that the community better understands the full range of physical and non-physical tactics used
by perpetrators of family and domestic violence, and their impacts. The National Principles will also
help to inform more effective and consistent responses to coercive control, for example within training
and education.
The Government has strengthened efforts to prevent and respond to forced marriage of women and girls
through continuing work to develop a model for enhanced civil protection and remedies for individuals
in, or at risk of, forced marriage under the National Action Plan to Combat Modern Slavery 2020-25.
The model is intended to complement existing Commonwealth criminal offences by enhancing civil
protections available to prevent forced marriages and support those affected. The Government is
consulting with the states and territories, and civil society, in developing options for the model.
Raising awareness of, and addressing, the health impacts of violence against women and girls is a key
priority under the National Women’s Health Strategy 2020-2030. The National Strategy recognises the
significant and long-term physical and emotional implications for the health of victim-survivors of
violence.
Funding of $1.7 million over three years has been allocated in the 2022-23 Budget through the
Department of Health and Aged Care to support community-led approaches for the prevention of
FGM/C including support for community awareness of the consequences of FGM/C. Activities will
support establishment of a community of practice and support health professional training to increase
the Australian workforce ability to address the health impacts of FGM/C.
To help combat FGM/C the Government has also provided funding under the Women’s Leadership and
Development Program (WLDP) since 2017-18 to the Multicultural Centre for Women's Health
(MCWH) to deliver the National Education Toolkit for Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting Awareness
(NETFA) project. This community-led, multilingual project raises awareness about the harmful impacts
of FGM/C and provides support to women who have experienced FGM/C.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan be named the ‘National plan to reduce family,
domestic and sexual violence’.
Not supported
28
The full name “The National Plan to End Violence Against Women and Children 2022-2032: Ending
gender-based violence in one generation” reflects a more ambitious agenda, to end violence rather than
to just reduce violence, as living free from violence is a basic human right. Though this vision is
ambitious, if all governments, businesses and the community pull in the same direction, it can be
achieved.
The National Plan title includes the term ‘violence against women’ because this encompasses a broader
range of violence than the language ‘family, domestic and sexual violence’. This includes forms of
violence such as online abuse, trafficking of women and children, and violence perpetrated in settings
that are not domestic, such as violence against women in institutions. This is in recognition that FDSV
is overwhelmingly perpetrated by men against women and children.
The National Plan focuses on gender-based violence, acknowledging victim-survivors can identify as
any gender identity.
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan promote and enhance an integrated whole-of-
service-system response to family, domestic and sexual violence across jurisdictions.
Supported
The National Plan has 6 cross-cutting principles, one of which is person-centred coordination and
integration. The National Plan recognises an integrated whole-of-service-system response to FDSV is
an integral part of creating a person-centred service system that supports victim-survivors.
Through the implementation of the National Plan, the Government will work with state and territory
governments to develop mechanisms that enable coordination and collaboration, and promote
consistency between legislative and policy reforms, programs and other response and prevention
efforts.
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan promote and enhance a whole-of-society
response to family, domestic and sexual violence that involves businesses, community groups and other
non-government bodies, as well as governments.
Supported
The National Plan encompasses a whole-of-society response to FDSV and recognises that sustained,
collective action is required across society to address the drivers and reinforcing factors of gender-
based violence. All individuals have a meaningful role to play in ending violence – as families, friends,
work colleagues, employers, businesses, sporting organisations, media, educational institutions, service
providers, community organisations, service systems and governments.
The National Plan outlines several objectives across the four domains to support this response,
including building sectoral and community capacity to identify and support women and children at
increased risk of experiencing gender-based violence, as well as ensuring victim-survivors are well
supported in all aspects of their daily lives through trauma informed, culturally safe and accessible
services that support longer-term recovery.
The National Plan includes a specific focus on the role of business and industry in responding to FDSV,
29
recognising these sectors can invest in and implement innovative strategies and initiatives across the
continuum of prevention through to recovery and healing to end violence against women and children.
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends that responsibility for the implementation of the next National Plan continue
to rest with the Department of Social Services.
Supported
The National Plan is a whole-of-system response to FDSV and requires action across all governments
and sectors. Overall responsibility for the implementation of the National Plan will continue to sit with
DSS while the implementation of individual measures under the Action Plans will be supported by the
relevant Commonwealth agency or jurisdiction.
Recommendation 9
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government direct and appropriately resource the
Australian Bureau of Statistics to conduct the Personal Safety Survey on an annual basis and ensure that
the survey collects information about the prevalence of specific forms of family, domestic and sexual
violence and complex forms of violence.
Not supported
The Government has funded the Personal Safety Survey (PSS) over the forward estimates for a survey
conducted every four years.
The Government does not support conducting the PSS annually due to the:
• significant burden placed on respondents who are asked to share sensitive information
about multiple forms of violence experienced in their lifetime.
• substantial investment/resources required to enumerate the survey ($17.5 million to
produce the PSS 2021).
Further, conducting a detailed annual collection is not expected to detect meaningful changes in the
prevalence of the wide range of violence types, year on year. However, in response to the demand for
annual insights, from 2023 onwards, the ABS Crime Victimisation Survey includes several questions
which will produce some high level statistics on experiences of family and intimate partner violence.
Similarly to PSS, it is still not expected to show significant annual changes.
The Government supports a range of other surveys and research that provide additional information and
data on specific issues such as Australia’s National Research Organisation for Women’s Safety
(ANROWS) funded research, the National Survey on Sexual Harassment in Australia’s Workplaces,
the National Homicide Monitoring Program (NHMP), the National Community Attitudes Survey, and
the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) interactive dashboards on family, domestic and
sexual violence data in Australia. AIHW has also received funding under the 2021-22 Budget to
develop a a site housing the FDSV related data and reports.
Recommendation 10
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government direct and appropriately resource the
30
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare to develop a national data collection on service-system
contacts with victim-survivors and perpetrators, including data from primary health care, ambulance,
emergency department, police, justice, and legal services.
Further, the Committee recommends that the Australian Government, and state and territory
governments, provide appropriate funding and support to service providers to implement consistent data
collection procedures.
Supported in principle
Funding has been allocated to the AIHW to lead the scoping and development of an integrated data
system which can form the basis for future expansion and development. The long-term aim is to have a
data system which can provide a more complete picture of the life experiences, service pathways and
outcomes of people experiencing FDSV, including victim-survivors and perpetrators, in order to inform
policy and improve outcomes for women and children. This project will leverage and align with
broader reforms to national data integration and consider work underway by the Australian Bureau of
Statistics (ABS) to link criminal justice datasets.
The AIHW has also been funded to expand and enhance its national monitoring, reporting, and data
work on FDSV. This project could incorporate some data development work related to specific health
or welfare service-level data collections, for example improved capture of injury related to family
violence in national emergency department data.
The Government has also funded the development of a prototype national FDSV specialist service data
collection (see Recommendation 11).
Recommendation 11
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government direct and appropriately resource the
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare to develop a national data collection on the use of, and unmet
demand for, specialist family, domestic and sexual violence services.
Supported
Funding has been allocated to the AIHW to lead the development of a prototype national FDSV
specialist service data collection to bring together disparate sources of frontline service information.
This work will inform recommendations for the establishment of an ongoing, national specialist
services data collection which could be expanded and built on in the future. A national data collection
will enhance understanding of service usage, demand and gaps. It will also improve understanding of
the impacts of FDSV, and patterns and pathways of specialist service use.
This collection could be designed to support measurement of unmet demand for people who approach
the FDSV services in scope. Measurement of population-level demand, and unmet demand, for services
will need to be estimated through population surveys.
Recommendation 12
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government lead the development of a national family,
domestic and sexual violence death toll.
Further, the Committee recommends the Australian Government consider the need for additional
measures to ensure better integration of data from family, domestic and sexual violence death reviews
31
across all Australian jurisdictions.
Supported
The Australian Institute of Criminology’s (AIC) National Homicide Monitoring Program (NHMP) is a
national data collection focussing on homicide incidents, victims and offenders. The NHMP collates
information from state and territory police, coronial and court document data sources and reports on
FDSV related homicides (i.e. murder, manslaughter and infanticide) in the annual Homicide in
Australia report series. The NHMP also contributes to comprehensive studies about FDSV related
homicide, such as the Pathways to intimate partner homicide report released by ANROWS in 2022
which examined 199 male-perpetrated homicides of a female intimate partner to identify primary
offender cohorts and the nature and course of intimate partner homicide in Australia.
Establishing a national FDSV death toll is dependent on several factors, including the period taken to
finalise coronial investigations and other relevant legal decisions about the case. The AIC is examining
a set of reporting options that would support the development of a death toll. The first is the
establishment of a Homicide in Australia quarterly dashboard which releases national, quarterly data on
homicide incidents. The dashboard would include data on number of homicide incidents by homicide
type in the last quarter, year to date and last five years, victim and offender sex, relationship between
victim and primary offender and a small set of additional variables where quarterly data are available.
The second is to publish a concise, standalone summary report of FDSV-related homicides with the
annual Homicide in Australia report each year. The summary report would provide further detail
captured in the NHMP on FDSV related homicide incidents.
The Australian Domestic and Family Violence Death Review Network (Network) releases publications
on family and domestic violence related deaths.
On 22 February 2022, ANROWS released a research report titled Australian Domestic and Family
Violence Death Review: Intimate partner violence homicides 2010‒2018. The report details data
findings on intimate partner violence homicides from July 2010 to June 2018, providing a national
picture of the characteristics present in intimate partner violence homicides in Australia. A national
minimum dataset also sits behind the report on Intimate Partner Violence Homicides, which contains a
range of data that is consistently captured across all Australian jurisdictions for each of these
homicides. As part of the collaborative partnership between ANROWS and the Network, a national
minimum dataset is currently being developed for family and domestic violence context filicides in
Australia. A corresponding report will be released in 2023.
Recommendation 13
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, and state and territory governments,
continue to provide increased funding for frontline family, domestic and sexual violence services in the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Supported
The 2021-22 Budget committed funding of $260.0 million for a 2-year National Partnership on Family,
Domestic and Sexual Violence Responses (2021-23) (FDSV National Partnership) with state and
territory governments to support frontline FDSV services and to trial new initiatives to support women
and children experiencing violence.
In the October 2022-23 Budget, the government committed an additional $10.7 million under the
32
FDSV National Partnership to bolster frontline FDSV services in the Northern Territory.
This builds on the $130.0 million provided to states and territories in 2020 under the National
Partnership on COVID-19 Domestic and Family Violence Responses (COVID-19 National
Partnership), to invest in services to support women and children who were experiencing or at risk of
violence during the pandemic.
The October 2022-23 Budget also committed $169.4 million over four years to provide an additional
500 frontline service and community workers across Australia and $25.0 million over five years for
innovative responses to address perpetrator behaviour. These initiatives will be delivered by state and
territory governments.
Recommendation 14
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan include measures informed by the experience of
family, domestic and sexual violence in the COVID-19 pandemic, including but not limited to:
• integration of family, domestic and sexual violence in emergency planning and disaster response
frameworks;
• increased support for the health and welfare of frontline workers, at all times but particularly
during emergencies and disasters; and
• increased use of technology and new service delivery models to improve access to services.
Supported in principle
The National Plan acknowledges that women and children face an increased risk of FDSV during and
after natural disasters and other emergencies, including the COVID-19 pandemic. The National Plan
recognises the need to enhance responses to FDSV in these circumstances to better support victim-
survivors.
The Government currently funds Gender and Disaster Australia (GADAus) for training and resources
delivered to frontline responders and communities to better support the safety of women and children
experiencing or at risk of violence when disasters strike.
The National Plan also recognises the need for improved access to services for victim-survivors. Under
the Recovery and healing domain, the National Plan includes an objective that focuses on ensuring
victim-survivors are well supported in all aspects of their daily lives through trauma-informed,
culturally safe and accessible services that support long-term recovery. This may include increased use
of technology to support improved access to services.
33
Governance, coordination and evaluation
Recommendation 15
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government seek the agreement of state and territory
governments to make a representative of the Australian Local Government Association a member of the
National Federation Reform Council Taskforce on Women’s Safety.
Noted
On 30 September 2022, National Cabinet agreed to the recommendations put forward by the First
Secretaries Group’s Review of the Ministerial Councils. As a result, the Women and Women’s Safety
Ministerial Council (WWSMC) has been formally established as part of the renewed federal relations
architecture. The WWSMC will replace the National Federation Reform Council Taskforce on
Women’s Safety, however will continue to be co-chaired by the Commonwealth Minister for Women
and the Commonwealth Minister for Social Services.
The WWSMC Terms of Reference (ToRs), including membership of the WWSMC, was finalised in
early 2023 following endorsement by members of the WWSMC.
The Government understands that addressing and ending FDSV requires involvement of all
stakeholders, including local government. The ToRs will allow for members of the council to invite
expert advisers to participate in specific meetings or discussions, as appropriate. This may include
representatives of the Australian Local Government Association (ALGA).
Recommendation 16
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and territory governments directly
involve local government in the development and implementation of the next National Plan. If not
achieved through the Australian Local Government Association’s (ALGA) membership on the National
Federation Reform Council Taskforce on Women’s Safety, another appropriate mechanism should be
utilised to facilitate ALGA’s engagement.
Supported in principle
To inform development of the National Plan, the Government undertook three separate public
consultation processes through the DSS Engage website from 2021 to early 2022. All stakeholders were
eligible to participate in these processes, including local government associations.
The Government will consult with state and territory governments on ALGA’s engagement in the
implementation of the National Plan.
Recommendation 17
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and each state and territory government co-
fund on a 50-50 basis a dedicated family and domestic violence policy officer in each state and territory
local government association for an initial period of five years.
In addition, the Australian Government and state and territory governments should work with the
Australian Local Government Association to consider whether additional resources are required to assist
individual local governments to have a more active role in preventing and responding to family, domestic
34
and sexual violence, and to implement the Prevention toolkit for local government.
Noted
Through the FDSV National Partnership, the Government is working with state and territory
governments to support frontline FDSV services and trial new initiatives to support women and
children experiencing violence. Funding is conditional on contributions from states and territories, in
recognition that responding to violence is a shared responsibility of all Australian governments and that
states and territories have primary responsibility for frontline services.
States and territories are responsible for distributing the funding under the FDSV National Partnership
to services based on needs in their jurisdictions.
Recommendation 18
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan include a commitment to improve the
transparency of funding for family, domestic and sexual violence programs and services.
The Committee further recommends that Australian Government funding provided to state and territory
governments for family, domestic and sexual violence programs and services be linked to requirements
that those governments:
• fund related programs and services within their own jurisdictions on an agreed minimum ratio
basis of the funding provided by the Australian Government; and
• report regularly on their own funding for related programs and services.
Supported in principle
The National Plan recognises all Australian governments have a shared responsibility for ending
violence against women and children.
Through the FDSV National Partnership, the Government is working with state and territory
governments to support frontline FDSV services and trial new initiatives to support women and
children experiencing violence. Funding is conditional on contributions from states and territories, in
recognition that responding to violence is a shared responsibility of all Australian governments and that
states and territories have primary responsibility for frontline services.
Through the FDSV National Partnership, the Commonwealth, state and territory governments are
working together to deliver meaningful improvements to data and reporting. This will contribute to a
better understanding of the needs of the FDSV sector and ongoing demand. These requirements build
on the existing reporting framework for the previous COVID-19 National Partnership.
Recommendation 19
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in consultation with state and territory
governments, develop a needs-based funding methodology to account for variations in the presentation
of family, domestic and sexual violence in different jurisdictions.
This methodology should be applied to future Australian Government and state and territory
governments’ funding for family, domestic and sexual violence programs.
35
Supported in principle
The Government will consult with state and territory governments on implementation of this
recommendation.
Funding under the FDSV National Partnership is currently allocated on a per capita basis, with a
loading for remote and very remote communities. This approach was agreed between the
Commonwealth and state and territory governments.
Additional funding of $10.7 million for the Northern Territory in 2022-23 was announced on 18 August
2022, in recognition of the higher rates of violence and complexities of remote service delivery. This
funding will support a broad range of FDSV organisations and services in the Northern Territory.
A needs-based funding model would require consensus among state and territory governments to this
approach. Any model would need to be developed carefully to take into account factors such as the
methodology for determining need and the availability of nationally consistent data. Consideration of
a needs-based funding approach is best considered following completion of work currently underway
by the AIHW to fill identified data gaps and work towards consistent definitions for FDSV nationally.
Recommendation 20
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan include a commitment to an ongoing program
of independent and transparent monitoring and evaluation, which:
• includes formal opportunities for victim-survivors and other nongovernment stakeholders to
provide input; and
• is overseen by the proposed National Commissioner for the prevention of family, domestic and
sexual violence, or another independent body.
Supported
Planning activities for the monitoring and evaluation of the National Plan are underway. This includes
development of the Outcomes Framework which will be a key component of the National Plan
evaluation strategy. Work on the Outcomes Framework and associated monitoring and evaluation
activities is being developed in consultation with key stakeholders including state and territory
governments, the Advisory Council and the National Plan Advisory Group (NPAG).
The DFSV Commission will report on progress against the National Plan to ensure it delivers real and
tangible actions. The DFSV Commission will hold all levels of governments to account through a
yearly report to Parliament.
Recommendation 21
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan include a commitment to provide funding for
Australia's National Research Organisation for Women's Safety for the life of the plan.
Supported in principle
The Government recognises the importance of building the evidence base to enhance our knowledge of
what works, to improve policies, programs and other initiatives, and to contribute to the prevention of
violence by addressing its underlying drivers. The Government acknowledges the important work of
ANROWS in leading the national FDSV research agenda and has committed funding of $23 million
36
over five years in the 2022-23 Budget for ANROWS to continue its role in providing national
leadership on data and evidence related to violence against women and children.
Recommendation 22
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government ensure that specific family, domestic and
sexual violence programs funded either directly or indirectly by the Australian Government include
funding for a standardised evaluation component. Evaluations should be published where possible.
Further, the Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in consultation with state and
territory governments, consider the need for:
• the development of accredited standards or agreed outcomes measures to guide evaluations of
family, domestic and sexual violence programs and services;
• additional support and training to assist organisations in undertaking evaluations; and
• a national platform for the publication of evaluations.
Supported in principle
Evaluation of a number of programs funded directly by the Government will drive program design and
service delivery improvements that, in turn, will deliver better outcomes for victim-survivors.
Additionally, through initiatives funded under the 2021-22 Budget, work is underway to develop data
collection mechanisms, noting the success of these mechanisms will be contingent on states and
territories collecting and providing data.
The DFSV Commission will promote consistent monitoring and evaluation on progress against the
National Plan across the Commonwealth and state and territory governments.
Recommendation 23
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government establish as an independent statutory office
a National Commissioner for the prevention of family, domestic and sexual violence.
The functions of the Commissioner should include promoting and enhancing a whole-of-government,
cross-jurisdictional approach to policy development, research, data collection, and monitoring and
evaluation with respect to family, domestic and sexual violence initiatives.
The Commissioner should:
• report to the Minister for Social Services;
• be an ex officio observer on the National Federation Reform Council Taskforce on Women’s
Safety;
• be responsible for monitoring and evaluation of the next National Plan;
• provide a formal mechanism for consultation with victim-survivors and non-government
organisations; and
37
• provide an annual report to the Parliament.
The Commissioner should be provided with appropriate resources to perform its functions for the
duration of the next National Plan.
Supported
On 1 July 2022, the Government established the DFSV Commission as an Executive Agency reporting
to the Assistant Minister for the Prevention of Family Violence.
The Executive Order dated 17 March 2022 prescribed the functions listed in this recommendation for
the Commission (with consideration given to ensuring that appropriate functions are passed from
existing bodies such as the Office for Women and DSS). The Commission has committed to providing
a yearly report to parliament on progress against the National Plan. The Commission has been provided
with $27.4 million over five years to perform these functions.
38
Non-physical forms of violence
Recommendation 24
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and territory governments develop
shared principles to guide any future offences of coercive and controlling behaviour, with a view to
ensuring consistency across jurisdictions to the extent possible.
These principles should address:
• the behaviours and patterns of behaviour captured by any new offences;
• the breadth of relationships captured by any new offences;
• the standard of proof required by any new offences;
• mitigating the impact of any new offences on groups with particular vulnerabilities; and
• associated implementation issues, including but not limited to minimum standards for training in
any new offences; and, very importantly, public awareness raising about any new offences.
Supported
Coercive control is a pressing issue that requires a coordinated, national approach. The Commonwealth,
states and territories are working together to develop National Principles to Address Coercive Control
(National Principles) through the Standing Council of Attorneys-General (SCAG) with a view to
finalising the National Principles in 2023.
The draft National Principles address the following:
• The common features of coercive control, including behaviours and patterns of behaviour and
the breadth of relationships where coercive control can occur.
• The impacts of coercive control on victim-survivors
• Awareness-raising of coercive control and the need to ensure that legal responses are supported
by education and training initiatives to ensure any new laws are implemented effectively.
• The specific experiences of coercive control affecting diverse groups of people, such as First
Nations people, people with disability, culturally and linguistically diverse and LGBTQIA+
communities.
• The effects of discrimination and inequality and how this may interact with any legal response
to coercive control, and
• The potential unintended consequences of criminalisation.
The National Principles will help create a shared national understanding of coercive control, raise
awareness of coercive control, inform more effective responses to family and domestic violence, and
promote more consistent support and safety outcomes for victim-survivors.
Decisions about criminalising coercive control, including whether to criminalise, the breadth of any
new offences and the standard of proof, are a matter for each state and territory to determine. As such,
39
the National Principles do not address these elements, but will inform consideration of new coercive
control offences in states and territories. The National Principles recognise that criminalisation is only
one part of a broader approach to addressing coercive control, and the National Plan highlights coercive
control as a key area of focus for addressing gender-based violence in Australia.
Under Closing the Gap Priority Reform One, the Government is committed to working in partnership
with First Nations peoples through shared-decision making and formal partnerships. In recognising that
First Nations experiences of coercive control in intimate partner situations may differ from mainstream
experiences, the Government engaged KPMG, which partnered with an Indigenous consulting firm, to
develop and deliver a tailored First Nations’ consultation strategy on the draft National Principles.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are also represented on the National Principles Stakeholder
Advisory Group.
A recent study has shown that First Nations women experience coercive control at a higher rate than
non-Indigenous women and the cumulative experiences of both coercive control and physical and/or
sexual violence are higher for First Nations women.1 Despite this, research and data on First Nations
experiences of coercive control in the context of interpersonal violence remains limited. It is crucial to
engage closely with First Nations stakeholders to strengthen our understanding of coercive control in
Indigenous contexts – its manifestation, prevalence, and self-determined solutions.
Recommendation 25
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government fund a specific public awareness campaign
about coercive and controlling behaviour as a form of family, domestic and sexual violence and a
predictor of severe physical violence and homicide.
Supported in principle
Public awareness campaigns can be a useful tool for Government to share information and raise
important issues. Any public awareness campaigns will be evidence-based to ensure they enhance
understanding of the issue and support behavior change.
When the National Principles are finalised in 2023, the SCAG will consider next steps for
implementation, including promotion and awareness-raising.
Recommendation 26
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, and state and territory governments,
develop and provide funding for training for the identification of coercive and controlling behaviour for
police; justice and legal sector practitioners; and health, mental health, social services, and specialist
family, domestic and sexual violence service workers.
The Committee further recommends that the Australian Government and state and territory governments
consider developing minimum standards for training on coercive control and including training on
coercive control in relevant professional qualifications.
Supported in principle
The National Plan recognises the need to increase specialist and targeted training for police, judiciary
and the legal profession on FDSV, including coercive control and misidentification of perpetrators, to
facilitate a transition to pattern-based responses to FDSV.
40
Family violence issues were updated in a number of recently completed training package development
projects, including those relating to qualifications for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health
workers, and those working with youth, children/families at risk and in the community development
area (for example, skills in the areas of working with families, mediation, case management and child
protection were a key focus of a review of ten qualifications included Community Services training
package which was completed in February 2022).
The Government is establishing Jobs and Skills Councils to provide industry with a stronger, more
strategic voice and broader role in ensuring Australia’s vocational education and training (VET) system
continues to deliver on employer and learner needs. Among other things, Jobs and Skills Councils will
have responsibility for ensuring Training Package qualifications remain current and fit for purpose. The
Government will ensure the recommendation to develop training for the identification of coercive and
controlling behaviour is considered by the relevant Jobs and Skills Councils once established.
The Government notes that non-accredited training also plays an important role in assisting front-line
workers in responding to family violence issues.
The Government, with the states and territories, co-funds the Australasian Institute of Judicial
Administration (AIJA) to develop and maintain the National Domestic and Family Violence Bench
Book (Bench Book). The Bench Book is an online resource for judicial officers considering legal issues
relevant to family and domestic violence related matters. The Government also co-funds the National
Judicial College of Australia (NJCA) to deliver the Family Violence in the Court (FVitC) training
program for judicial officers, which builds upon the Bench Book. In June 2021, the Government
provided additional funding for the Bench Book and the FVitC training program to include new content
on coercive control and to run a judicial training program with an enhanced focus on coercive control.
In the 2022-23 Budget, the Government provided funding to develop training for legal practitioners on
coercive control. This will build on work the Government is currently undertaking with states and
territories on the development of the National Principles.
Training for law enforcement will be developed as part of the Government’s $4.1m training package to
enhance the effectiveness of police responses to FDSV. One of the key streams of focus is coercive
control, which will be informed by the National Principles.
Any state and territory financial contributions to these training and education measures remains a
matter for state and territory governments.
Recommendation 27
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and territory governments
undertake a review of relevant risk identification, risk assessment, and risk management practices to
ensure that coercive and controlling behaviour is adequately captured.
Supported in principle
The Government notes this recommendation seeks to improve the early identification of coercive
control through training across a range of sectors, and embedding coercive control in relevant risk
assessment and management practices. The National Principles will create a shared national
understanding of coercive control, which will support Commonwealth and state and territory
governments to adequately and consistently capture coercive and controlling behaviour in relevant risk
identification, risk assessment and risk management practices.
41
The Government has provided $4.1 million in funding to enhance the effectiveness of police responses
to FDSV through the development and delivery of a national training package, which will include a
specific stream on coercive control. This may also help identify risk identification and assessment of
coercive control in the law enforcement sector.
The AIC is also undertaking a series of studies on police risk assessment of domestic violence. As part
of this research, the AIC is examining the incorporation of coercive controlling behaviour into police
estimations of risk, and the extent to which this behaviour is associated with the occurrence of further
violence, and further escalation in violence. This research will be considered in the context of the
impact on a diverse range of groups, including First Nations people.
Recommendation 28
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government continue funding for critical research
around the context, motives and outcomes of technology-facilitated abuse—in particular, by providing
dedicated funding to the Office of the eSafety Commissioner and Australia’s National Research
Organisation for Women’s Safety.
Supported in principle
The Government recognises that technology-facilitated abuse is a serious, pervasive and often
dangerous form of abuse.
The constant evolution of technology means the threat landscape for technology-facilitated abuse is
dynamic and changing. This makes recognising and addressing how technology is weaponised as a tool
of abuse challenging.
As such, the Government supports the need for continued funding for greater research that explores the
nature and impact of technology-facilitated abuse, so that evidence-based solutions can be identified,
implemented and evaluated on an ongoing and iterative basis.
This research will explore the context, motives and outcomes of technology-facilitated abuse across the
four domains outlined in the National Plan: Prevention, Early Intervention, Response, and Recovery
and healing.
To date, the eSafety Commissioner (eSafety) has undertaken a suite of research on technology-
facilitated abuse in order to address gaps in the evidence for at-risk or marginalised groups. This
includes two reports released in August 2021: one exploring the experiences of women with intellectual
or cognitive disability;2 the other exploring the experiences of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
women in remote and regional areas.3 In December 2020, eSafety released research4 on children and
technology-facility abuse in family and domestic violence situations.
eSafety will examine the nature, characteristics and context of technology-facilitated abuse in further
research. This may include examining risk factors and protective factors for victimisation and
perpetration, as well as the short and long-term impacts of abuse and potential prevention and response
measures.
Future funding for eSafety will be considered by the Government in the context of the Budget.
Recent research produced by ANROWS includes the 2022 ANROWS report, ‘Technology-facilitated
abuse: National survey of Australian adults’ experiences’.5
The 2022-23 Budget provided $23 million over five years for an ANROWS priority research fund.
42
Research projects considered for funding will be broadly determined by their relevance to evidence
gaps identified in the National Plan and Australia’s National Research Agenda.
Recommendation 29
Based on recommendations from the eSafety Commissioner, the Committee recommends that the
Australian Government, in cooperation with state and territory governments where applicable:
• Develop and implement education initiatives that drive cultural change and increase awareness
about the abusive nature and legal implications of technology-facilitated abuse, focused on women and
girls at risk of experiencing technology-facilitated abuse and men and boys at risk of perpetrating it.
• Through a process of co-design, work with at-risk communities to develop resources to raise
their awareness of technology-facilitated abuse and their capacity to identify and manage it.
• Develop resources for children and young people to help them understand and manage the ways
that technology is used in family, domestic and sexual violence.
• Develop and implement capacity building initiatives to increase all women’s and girls’ skills in
online safety and digital literacy.
• Embed comprehensive and nationally coordinated respectful relationships and online safety
education into the Australian curriculum across all learning stages.
• Facilitate more gender-balanced science, technology, engineering and maths (STEM) industries
by developing initiatives to upskill and reskill women for entry opportunities and leadership pathways in
STEM.
• Ensure Australia is represented on, and contributes to, global initiatives and coalitions to advance
the rights of women and girls and uphold and deliver on international agreements, including in relation
to technology-facilitated abuse, the potential for technology to drive gender equality, and Safety by
Design.
• Ensure that capacity building initiatives to increase women’s skills in online safety and digital
literacy occur both in Australia and in our region.
• Ensure government support and funding for Safety by Design and encourage industry players to
implement and champion its principles, to promote a safer online environment for women and girls.
• Fund the eSafety Women program on an ongoing basis.
• Expand the eSafety Women program to deliver education and training to the judiciary, legal
profession, and law enforcement.
• Establish a new program to provide training for frontline workers and others about how children
are involved in technology-facilitated abuse cases involving their parents.
• Fund eSafety to evaluate and advise on technical solutions to protect victim-survivors
experiencing technology-facilitated abuse.
• Provide dedicated funding for Safety by Design to assist in increasing its adoption and impact.
43
• Develop an education and awareness campaign on dating applications.
Supported in principle
The Government recognises that addressing technology-facilitated abuse and promoting online safety
requires a whole-of-government and whole-of-community approach. The National Plan explores how
technology is used to perpetrate violence and points to the need to harness technology in the prevention
of violence against women and children. The National Plan also outlines the importance of training and
information for frontline workers on technology-facilitated abuse.
Working in consultation with state and territory governments, the Government will seek to draw upon a
range of social, behavioural, educational, cultural and technological levers to implement this
recommendation.
Education
The Government recognises the importance of embedding online safety, digital literacy and respectful
relationships into the Australian Curriculum.
Supporting children with the knowledge and life-long skills they need to negotiate the digital world
safely and respectfully starts at a young age. eSafety’s Early Years Program supports families and
educators to provide pre-school children with the foundational skills and protective skills of resilience,
respect, critical thinking and help-seeking. In the first years of school, children learn key concepts of
privacy and security and why they are important, which builds their digital literacy and practice of
digital safety and wellbeing.
eSafety’s Toolkit for Schools is designed to support schools create safer online environments. The
resources are categorised into four elements: Prepare, Engage, Educate and Respond. Whether the
resources from each element are used on their own or collectively, each contributes to creating safer
online environments for school communities.
eSafety also offers a range of online safety training programs for professionals across a variety of
sectors, including the education sector.
eSafety’s education resources align with its Best Practice Framework for Online Safety Education and
key areas of the curriculum. Classroom resources are accompanied by professional learning and
resources for parents and carers in recognition of the importance of a whole-school approach to online
safety education.
Supporting children and young people to recognise unsafe situations, to ask for help and to understand
how technology might be used in the context of abuse and violence requires an approach that first and
foremost recognises that it is the role of adults to protect children. It also requires a commitment to
privilege children’s voices, in order to develop a deep understanding of children’s experiences and the
barriers to help-seeking they face when confronted with online harms or other forms of technology-
facilitated abuse.
The Government, working with the eSafety Commissioner, the Australian Federal Police (AFP), state
and territory governments, education sectors and the regulatory authorities who are responsible for the
delivery of the curriculum, looks to promote educational practices that support the national priority of
ending violence against women and their children. To ensure that comprehensive teaching of respectful
relationships is a focus of classroom practice, the Government has provided age-appropriate respectful
relationships education resources for teachers, parents and students. These were initially developed as
44
part of the 2015 Women’s Safety Package to address FDSV and have been strengthened and developed
since.
ThinkUKnow, led by the AFP, is an evidence-based education program that is delivered nationally in
partnership with police and industry partners to prevent online child sexual exploitation and abuse. The
program addresses topics including self-generated child abuse material, online grooming, image-based
abuse, sexual extortion and, importantly, encourages help seeking behaviour. ThinkUKnow topics that
link to the Australian Curriculum include:
• sharing illegal content such as child abuse material/peers sharing content without consent
• how to deal being sent unsolicited material, and
• how to recognise the signs of online grooming and unsafe situations online (adult offenders).
Notably, the updated Australian Curriculum (version 9) was endorsed by education ministers on 1 April
2022 and published on a new website on 9 May 2022. One of the key updates was to the Health and
Physical Education learning area, which now includes consent and respectful relationships being
explored from Foundation to Year 10 in age-appropriate ways. This includes addressing and teaching
the skills required to seek, give or deny consent respectfully.
The Government is also investing $83.5 million over six years to support schools to deliver high-
quality, age appropriate, evidence-based consent and respectful relationships education. This
investment will be guided by experts and delivered in partnership with states and territories and non-
government school sectors, and includes:
• a rapid review of how consent education programs are currently being delivered in schools to
establish what works and identify gaps and opportunities.
• a national accreditation framework or guide to provide assurance to school communities that
they are delivering and receiving high quality evidence-based consent and respectful
relationships education programs.
Training
The Government recognises the role of the judicial system in ensuring technology-facilitated abuse is
addressed and responded to in a trauma informed way. It is therefore important that the judiciary, legal
profession, law enforcement and all other components of the judicial system are given capacity building
training in the nature, drivers and impacts of technology-facilitated abuse.
eSafety’s Frontline Worker Capacity Building Program delivers sessions on technology-facilitated
abuse to members of the judiciary, legal profession and law enforcement around Australia, including on
request whereby sessions are tailored to the needs of the specific audience.
eSafety is working with the NSW Police to identify their training needs regarding technology-
facilitated abuse and develop resources and tailored capacity building programs for their general duties
and specialist officers. This approach will be used to develop similar programs with other law
enforcement agencies across Australia.
eSafety is delivering a three-year project to provide targeted support for children experiencing
technology-facilitated abuse. The project will address the technology-facilitated abuse of young people
and children across four key themes: continuing research and consultation, raising awareness,
developing and implementing supporting resources and training, and evaluation. It will include
45
resources to help adults engaging with children, such as frontline workers and educators, to identify
early warning signs that children may be impacted and work with them on strategies to manage the
abuse or seek support. Webinars and face-to-face training sessions on children and technology
facilitated abuse are available for frontline workers and resources are under development.
Resources
The Government recognises the need to tailor and target resources to at-risk communities with an
emphasis on accessibility, inclusivity, cultural safety and linguistic diversity.
eSafety works with communities that are at risk of being targeted online and experiencing serious harm.
In particular, it works through an intersectional and co-design framework with First Nations people,
LGBTQI+ individuals and communities, people with disability and culturally and linguistically diverse
communities to help gain a better understanding of their online experiences, deliver meaningful support
and help drive behavioural change.
Under the Fourth Action Plan of the former National Plan, eSafety received funding to develop
additional tailored programs to support two cohorts of women at increased risk of technology-
facilitated abuse: women with disability and First Nations women.
eSafety’s program for women with intellectual and/or cognitive disability provides training for
specialist workers who support women with an intellectual and/or cognitive disability, including those
who assist with case planning, provide advocacy, or develop and implement policy. The training raises
awareness about how technology is used as a tool of abuse, but also a source of benefit and
opportunities, and builds knowledge and skills within frontline services to better assist women with an
intellectual and/or cognitive disability.
eSafety’s program for First Nations communities provides online training for frontline workers who
support First Nations women to understand how the history and context of First Nations peoples affects
experiences of technology-facilitated abuse and online environments. Under this program, eSafety has
co-designed and developed culturally appropriate awareness activities with First Nations communities.
eSafety also provides resources in 27 languages other than English and for people with low literacy.
Initiatives for women and girls
The Government recognises the importance of capacity building for women and girls across the
lifecycle and across a range of settings.
eSafety has a range of resources to build the capacity of women and girls to engage online safely. In
addition, some programs seek to equip women and girls with skills in digital literacy, which then
become a protective factor when engaging online. eSafety’s resources adopt an intersectional gendered
lens to understanding the online experiences of women and girls.
eSafety’s Women In The Spotlight program includes social media self-defence training to help women
use social media platforms more safely and effectively. The training teaches women how to use tech
tools to manage their social media safely, report online abuse and protect their own wellbeing.
eSafety also engages directly with girls and young women through the Online Safety Youth Advisory
Council (members are aged 13 to 24 years). This provides an opportunity for young people to discuss
key online safety issues that impact them and for their insights to shape resources and policies.
The Be Connected program, overseen by eSafety and DSS, is a Government initiative that aims to build
46
the confidence, digital skills and online safety of older Australians, including older women.
Safety by Design
The Government recognises that women and girls will not be safe online, if the digital technologies
they use are fundamentally unsafe.
eSafety’s Safety by Design initiative places the safety and rights of users at the start and core of design.
It highlights that when digital products and services are designed without safety at the forefront, they
can be weaponised or misused to cause harm, including to women and girls.
Safety by Design encourages industry to anticipate, detect and eliminate online risk, as encapsulated
through three principles that provide platforms and services with guidance as to how they incorporate,
assess and enhance user safety:
• Service provider responsibility
• User empowerment and autonomy
• Transparency and accountability
Safety by Design was developed with industry and industry engagement remains a key feature of the
initiative. This enables eSafety to upskill industry stakeholders about the online harms that women and
girls may face when using online services, as well as the particular impact types of online products and
services can have on at-risk or marginalised groups, including women and girls. eSafety provides
assessment tools and is working to actively encourage industry adoption of Safety by Design
methodologies in the development and deployment of technology services and products.
For example, the AIC’s research report, Sexual harassment, aggression and violence victimisation
among mobile dating app and website users in Australia6 highlights that women are more likely to be
targeted for sexual harassment when using dating apps and websites. As a result, eSafety has sought to
engage with companies and peak bodies in the online dating sector to provide them with practical
recommendations and tools to support better outcomes. In addition, eSafety is scoping the development
of resources on safely engaging with online dating applications. On 25 January 2023, a National
Roundtable on Online Dating Safety was convened, bringing together key stakeholders to examine
what more can be done to improve safety for Australians using online dating platforms.
Increased opportunities for women in STEM
The Government supports the improvement of gender equity in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) industries, along the pathway from schooling through to industry leadership. This
includes committing $107 million from 2016-17 to 2027-28 on a range of initiatives designed to boost
women in STEM. This includes supporting the establishment of the Women in STEM Ambassador,
who provides expert advice to industry and government, advocates the case for change and works as a
role model for girls and women in STEM. The Government’s funding has also supported the
Ambassador’s delivery of the ‘Future You’ awareness raising initiative, which aims to raise awareness
of the exciting opportunities in STEM among children aged 8-12. It has also supported the
establishment of the Elevate scholarships program, which provides up to 500 university scholarships to
women to grow the future pool of women STEM leaders.
Global engagement
47
The Government recognises the importance of global engagement and coordination to strengthen online
safety nationally and internationally.
Like efforts to combat online child sexual abuse material and terrorist and violent extremist content,
global action is catalysing the response to technology-facilitated gender-based violence in all its forms.
These forms include technology-facilitated gender-based violence in intimate partner relationships,
online harassment and abuse against women in their personal and professional lives, image-based
abuse, gendered misinformation and disinformation online, and digital misogyny, including misogyny
linked to radicalisation.
eSafety’s primary focus is promoting and protecting the safety of Australians online. However,
international engagement to address technology-facilitated gender-based violence is a priority, in
recognition that often the perpetrators and platforms associated with this abuse are beyond eSafety’s
borders and that global regulatory developments can affect the safety and wellbeing of Australians
online.
As a global online safety leader with experience implementing prevention, protection and proactive
change measures for technology-facilitated gender-based violence, eSafety harnesses its unique
position to promote its specialist technical and regulatory measures internationally.
eSafety international engagements to address technology-facilitated gender-based violence include:
• Global Partnership for Action on Gender-Based Online Harassment and Abuse, which brings
together countries, international organisations, civil society and the private sector to better
prioritise, understand, prevent and address technology-facilitated gender-based violence.
• eSafety Women in the Pacific, which supports eSafety to work with Pacific governments, the
community and industry stakeholders to provide information, resources and training designed
to address violence against women and girls online, and to promote their full and effective
participation in public life. This is funded under the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade’s
(DFAT) Cyber and Critical Tech Cooperation Program, which is explored further below.
• Technical partnership with the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) on Technology-
Facilitated Gender-Based Violence, in order to support the UNFPA to work with organisations
and companies seeking to tackle this issue globally.
Other international and multistakeholder responses and processes that eSafety engages with to address
technology-facilitated gender-based violence include: the 2021 G7 Principles to tackle online violence
against women and girls, initiatives from the UNFPA, UN Women, the Web Foundation, the National
Democratic Institute, the Center for Countering Digital Hate, as well as research and projects from
academics and think tanks.
In addition to eSafety’s efforts, DFAT plays an important role in ensuring Australia is safe, secure and
prosperous offline, online, in Australia and around the world.
With Official Development Assistance funding, DFAT’s Cyber and Critical Tech Cooperation Program
(CCTCP) provides $74 million from 2016-2025. It is Australia’s primary mechanism for cyber and
critical technology capacity building.
The CCTCP builds the cyber and tech resilience of Indo-Pacific partner nations. The CCTCP is aligned
with Australia’s International Cyber and Critical Tech Engagement Strategy (2021). Priorities relating
to FDSV include:
48
• Stronger cybercrime prevention, prosecution, and cooperation (including cyber awareness,
online safety, cybercrime legislation and training for law enforcement)
• Advocating and protecting human rights and democracy online (including promoting respect
for freedom of expression online), and
• Mainstreaming gender equality, disability and social inclusion (GEDSI) across all CCTCP
activities in accordance with the Program’s GEDSI Strategy (2021).
The CCTCP recognises that cyber and critical technologies replicate and amplify existing social and
gender norms and inequalities. It will direct at least 10 per cent of the overall program budget to fund
strategic stand-alone initiatives that build GEDSI knowledge, data and practice in the sector by 2025.
Examples of GEDSI-focused programs under the CCTCP include:
• Understanding Technology-Facilitated Domestic Violence in the Pacific, delivered by Deakin
University (2022-2025), which builds understanding of the prevalence, nature and impacts of
technology-facilitated domestic violence in Fiji, Tonga and Vanuatu.
• Girls Online, delivered by ABC International Development (completed, 2020-2022), which
empowered young women aged 12-30 in Tonga and Vanuatu to participate meaningfully and
safely online, including by developing contextual and practical solutions to cyber hazards.
• Women in Cyber Fellowship, which ensures women are empowered to participate in the UN
Open Ended Working Group on responsible state behaviour in cyberspace.
• Women, Peace and Cybersecurity programme delivered by UN Women (2022-2024), which
strengthens the capacity of women’s civil society, human rights advocates and youth to
strengthen their resilience and cyber hygiene, and to advance policy spaces for gender-
responsive cybersecurity through blended learning methods.
• Strengthening Digital Media Literacy in the Mekong, delivered by the International Foundation
for Electoral Systems (2021-2024), which strengthens the efforts of civil society organisations
to counter disinformation and hate speech and build media literacy in Thailand, Cambodia and
Vietnam.
Funding
The Government recognises that funding is required to sustain and continuously improve responses to
address technology-facilitated abuse and promote online safety.
In the October 2022-23 Budget, the Government provided:
• $16.6 million over four years (2022-23 to 2025-26) for eSafety to develop a service, including
a helpline, to provide practical advice, support and guidance to victim-survivors of
technology-facilitated abuse, and the frontline workers who support them, within the context
of FDSV.
• $10 million over five years (2022-23 to 2026-27) for an online safety community grants
program to support community projects aimed at preventing technology-facilitated abuse of
women and their children.
49
• $5 million over five years to continue to raise awareness of eSafety and the protections under
the Online Safety Act 2021 (Online Safety Act).
The Government’s commitment to work in consultation with state and territory governments to drive a
multifaceted response to online safety will strengthen Australia’s capacity to address technology-
facilitated abuse and promote safer online environments nationally and internationally.
Recommendation 30
The Committee makes the additional following recommendations relating to technology-facilitated
abuse:
• There should be greater acknowledgement that appropriate technology use is a shared community
responsibility. It is not simply a responsibility of platforms to host and police content.
• There should be greater clarity around a platform’s obligation to remove content, including
through the Online Safety Act.
• In order to open or maintain an existing social media account, customers should be required by
law to identify themselves to a platform using 100 points of identification, in the same way as a person
must provide identification for a mobile phone account, or to buy a mobile SIM card.
• Social media platforms must provide those identifying details when requested by the eSafety
Commissioner, law enforcement or as directed by a court.
• The Government should consider regulating to enable law enforcement agencies to access a
platform’s end-to-end encrypted data, by warrant, in matters involving a threat to the physical or mental
wellbeing of an individual or in cases of national security.
• There should be a substantial increase in criminal and civil penalties for technology-facilitated
abuse to act as a greater deterrent for errant behaviour.
• All government hosted websites and applications should have readily available (and searchable)
avenues where a victim-survivor of technology-facilitated abuse can seek assistance to have abusive
material removed expeditiously.
Noted
The Government notes this recommendation, acknowledging the sensitivity and complexity of many of
the issues raised.
With the eSafety Commissioner responsible for coordinating online safety efforts across government,
the Government has a whole of government and cross portfolio commitment to addressing online harms
and promoting online safety. This recognises that safe online environments and safe use of technology
is a shared responsibility across government and the community.
Balancing safety, privacy and security
The Government acknowledges the need to balance safety, privacy and security and consider the
complementary disciplines alongside each other.
As recent data breaches have highlighted, there are risks associated with the collection and holding of
50
personal information. Further, identity requirements can also create barriers to digital participation for
individuals who may lack access to identity documents or feel uncomfortable providing their details.
In the context of a victim-survivor of FDSV, stringent identity requirements may be difficult for them
to meet or place them in danger if they do. This is particularly the case if the victim-survivor has
experienced technology-facilitated coercive control that includes the coercion and misuse of their
personal information.
A safe, privacy-preserving and data-minimising approach is needed.
Platform accountability and transparency
The Government has committed to a range of measures to enhance platform accountability and
transparency though the Online Safety Act, which commenced in January 2022.
Transparency and accountability are hallmarks of a robust approach to online safety. They are a key
pillar of relevant global principles, including eSafety’s Safety by Design initiative, which focuses on
the ways technology companies can embed safety into their culture, leadership and practices.
Transparency and accountability not only provide assurance that online services are operating
according to their published safety objectives. They also help to educate and empower people about the
steps they can take to address safety concerns.
The Basic Online Safety Expectations determined under the Online Safety Act drive transparency and
accountability on several existing and emerging safety issues. There are specific expectations for
providers of online services to take reasonable steps to prevent anonymous accounts or encrypted
services from being used for unlawful or harmful activity or material. eSafety has the power to require
service providers to report on how they are complying with these expectations, and to publish
statements about their compliance.
In addition, the Online Safety Act strengthens eSafety’s information-gathering powers. Under Part 13
of the Online Safety Act, eSafety can compel online service providers to produce information about the
identity of an end-user or contact details of an end-user, where it reasonably considers this information
is relevant to the operation of the Act. In addition, any person can be compelled to provide information
to the eSafety Commissioner that is relevant to an investigation of serious online adult cyber abuse
material, serious child cyberbullying material, and intimate images shared without consent or illegal
and restricted online content. This power will assist eSafety to conduct investigations into harmful
online behaviour, issue notices and issue fines.
Penalties for technology facilitated abuse and related activities
The Online Safety Act and the Online Safety (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments)
Act 2021 (the Transitional Act) came into effect in January 2022.
The Transitional Act enables strengthened criminal penalties for the use of a carriage service to
menace, harass or cause offence at sections 474.17 and 474.17A of the Criminal Code, which capture
criminal online abuse. The amendments:
• increase the maximum penalty for using a carriage service to menace, harass or cause offence
under section 474.17 of the Criminal Code from three years’ imprisonment to five years’
imprisonment, and
• increase the penalty under 474.17A(1) for the standard aggravated offence to section 474.17
that involves private sexual material from five years’ imprisonment to six years’ imprisonment.
51
It also amends paragraphs 474.17A(4)(d) and 474.17A(13)(a) to allow the special aggravated
offence to take into account civil penalties issued under the new adult cyber abuse scheme in
the Online Safety Act.
The Online Safety Act retains the civil penalty (500 penalty units) that previously applied under the
Enhancing Online Safety Act 2015 for posting, or threatening to post, an intimate image without a
person’s consent, an action which may stem from technology-facilitated abuse. It also retains the power
to give a remedial direction aimed at ensuring that a person does not share a person’s intimate images
without consent and to give an online service a removal notice in relation to that kind of material. The
associated civil penalty for non-compliance with a remedial direction or removal notice is 500 penalty
units.
Additionally, the Online Safety Act empowers the eSafety Commissioner to give notices that may
require a person to take all reasonable steps to remove serious online adult cyber-abuse material, or
material that is illegal or restricted online content, from an online service when directed to do so by the
eSafety Commissioner. Non-compliance with these kinds of may result in a civil penalty of up to 500
penalty units.
Where technology-facilitated abuse results in the provision of cyberbullying material targeted at an
Australian child under the Online Safety Act, the eSafety Commissioner can also require a person to
refrain from posting cyberbullying material and to apologise to a person who was the subject of
cyberbullying material. While non-compliance with this kind of notice is not subject to a civil penalty,
it may be subject to enforcement action through an injunction.
Regulating for lawful access to encrypted data
The Government reiterates that everyone deserves to be safe online. However, criminals and
perpetrators are exploiting personal and technological vulnerabilities to commit offences against
individuals, organisations and the Government.
The Government supports technologies like end-to-end encryption for its cybersecurity and privacy
benefits and does not advocate for “backdoors” or weakening end-to-end encryption. In the context of
FDSV, end-to-end encryption can provide victim-survivors with enhanced privacy protection to allow
them to stay safe or access healthcare.
However, whilst end-to-end encryption is critical to protecting data, it is being used by criminals to
conceal illicit behaviour and online harms. This makes it harder for law enforcement and national
security agencies to detect and investigate serious criminal activity, including online child sexual
exploitation and abuse, and identify perpetrators.
Default application of end-to-end encryption may also undermine current mechanisms digital platforms
deploy to detect and disrupt illicit behaviour online, therefore reducing the number of reports made to
authorities. The implementation of end-to-end encryption will also undermine the ability of law
enforcement to lawfully access content under the Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act
1979 to address serious criminal activity.
The Government is driving greater collaboration with international partners, law enforcement and
industry to balance strong and robust online privacy, safety and security. This includes working closely
with law enforcement and international partners to encourage industry to consider the increased public
safety implications of end-to-end encryption, particularly for women and children.
52
The International Statement on End to End Encryption and Public Safety (the Statement) is key to
driving this objective, as it calls on technology companies to work with governments and other
stakeholders to find reasonable, technically feasible solutions that ensure safety, without eroding user
privacy or cybersecurity. In particular, it urges industry to address concerns raised about encryption
being applied in a way that wholly precludes any legal access to content.
Australia and the United Kingdom maintain joint secretariat duties of the Statement and it has been
signed by the Five Countries, India and Japan. Australia will continue to engage countries around the
world on this Statement to obtain more signatories.
Recommendation 31
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan provide funding for programs, including in
schools, to improve the financial literacy and reduce the financial abuse of women.
Supported in principle
The National Plan highlights economic abuse, including financial abuse, as a key area of focus for
addressing gender-based violence in Australia.
The Government recognises it is important for young people to be equipped with the financial
knowledge, skills, attitudes, and confidence required to make informed financial decisions and develop
healthy financial habits into the future.
The Australian Curriculum for Foundation to Year 10 was endorsed by all education ministers on 1
April 2022 and offers opportunities for interdisciplinary approaches that support the development of
financial capability in students.
There is a growing number of Government resources available to support both students and teachers to
incorporate consumer and financial capability learning in the classroom, including the Australian
Securities and Investments Commission’s MoneySmart for Teachers and the Australian Taxation
Office’s (ATO) Paying it Forward and Tax, Super + You programs.
It is important to note that the delivery of education programs in schools is the responsibility of state
and territory government and non-government education authorities and individual schools. This
includes how consumer and financial capability is taught and the resources used to support that
teaching.
Funding was also provided under the Fourth Action Plan of the National Plan to Reduce Violence
against Women and their Children 2010-22 (former National Plan) for a number of projects to improve
financial literary and reduce the financial abuse of women, including:
• publication of a literature review on Preventing the Financial Abuse of Women;
• publication of Separating with debt: a guide to your legal options;
• publication of Supporting Women’s Financial Safety: A Guide to Prevention and Action on
Financial Abuse within the Financial Service Sector; and
• translation of the Harmony Alliance’s financial literacy e-tool into 10 community languages.
53
Recommendation 32
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with the states and territories (other
than Victoria) to provide funding for an increased number of financial counsellors.
Supported in principle
The Government will consult with state and territory governments on this recommendation, recognising
there are a range of programs and supports in place to support increased numbers of financial
counsellors, including additional funding and initiatives announced in the March 2022 and October
2022 Budgets.
The Government is partnering with various industries and the financial counselling sector on a new
industry funding model (the model) to deliver more frontline services for Australians experiencing
financial stress and difficulty, from 2023-24. The Government is consulting with the state and territory
governments on the model.
To support the model, the Government is investing $10.5 over four years from 2021-22, including $1.5
million to establish a new, not-for-profit body to manage industry funding, once the model is agreed;
and $9 million for a range of complementary initiatives to improve data collection, national
coordination and service innovation in the financial counselling sector, in consultation with states and
territories.
The industry-funding model will focus on supporting financially vulnerable people seeking assistance,
which includes women experiencing domestic or family violence and/or financial abuse.
Industry contributions will be on top of the almost $60 million in existing Australian Government
investments for financial counselling and financial resilience related services available to support
women impacted by family and domestic violence. This includes face-to-face financial counselling
services, a no interest loans scheme, a matched savings scheme, and innovative ways of supporting
women into employment and financial independence through a suite of microenterprise programs.
The October 2022 Budget also committed $169.4 million to be provided over four years from 2022-23
to work in conjunction with states and territories to support 500 additional frontline service and
community workers, including financial counsellors, to support women and children experiencing
FDSV. Half of these jobs will be allocated to rural, regional and remote areas with additional workers
to support the LGBTIQA+ community, women with disability, culturally and linguistically diverse
women and children, and First Nations people.
Recommendation 33
The Committee recommends that the Attorney-General take the following measures to enable the
identification of financial information and facilitate superannuation splitting:
• develop an administrative mechanism to enable swift identification of financial information,
including superannuation, by parties to family law proceedings or victim-survivors of family, domestic
or sexual violence; and
• amend the Family Law Act 1975 and relevant regulations to reduce the procedural and
substantive complexity associated with superannuation splitting orders, including by simplifying forms
required to be submitted to superannuation funds.
54
Supported in principle
The Government is implementing measures to improve disclosure of financial information to support
quicker resolution of family law property disputes. Since 1 April 2022, parties to family law property
proceedings have been able to apply to the family law courts to request their former partner's
superannuation information, held by the ATO.
Expanding the current information sharing mechanism to include all financial information held by the
ATO raises complex legal considerations including jurisdictional, integrity and privacy issues. There
are intricate secrecy provisions in place that provide particular restrictions and protections over the
sensitive information held by the ATO. The sharing and use of this information through such a
mechanism would require careful consultation and complex legislative amendments.
At this time, the Government does not propose to expand the current information-sharing mechanism to
include all financial information held by the ATO.
The Government acknowledges the complex nature of the superannuation splitting process, and
supports the development of superannuation splitting template orders. The Government notes that
template orders and letters for accumulation funds have already been developed and are currently being
trialled in certain matters.
Recommendation 34
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, and state and territory governments,
provide support for research and community awareness raising on the harmful practice of female genital
mutilation/cutting, including by providing ongoing funding for the National Education Toolkit for
Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting Awareness.
Supported in principle
The National Plan recognises that specific forms of violence may disproportionately impact women and
girls from culturally, ethnically, religiously and linguistically diverse communities and migrant and
refugee women, including FGM/C.
Under the Women’s Leadership and Development Program (WLDP), Office for Women has provided
time limited project funding to the Multicultural Centre for Women’s Health (MCWH) to deliver the
National Education Toolkit for Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting Awareness (NETFA) project.
Under an open competitive grant round, MCWH received $275,000 over 2017-18 to 2019-20 which
enabled MCWH to build on three years of evidence-based FGM/C prevention work to improve support
and raise awareness to Australian communities about the negative consequences of FGM/C through the
national coordination of a multimedia, multilingual campaign. The project enabled people from
communities affected by FGM/C, service providers and advocates to adopt successful prevention
strategies and take coordinated action to reduce the incidence of, and ultimately eliminate, FGM/C.
Through a subsequent open competitive grant round, MCWH was successful for further funding of
$773,193 over 2020-21 to 2023-24. This funding expands the NETFA project to deliver the
Communities Leading Change campaign. This community-led campaign provides national coordination
and provision of the latest research, information, education and resources to raise awareness about the
harmful impact of FGM/C, supporting communities across Australia to take action to prevent and
eliminate FGM/C. WLDP funding for the current NETFA project ends 30 June 2024.
55
The Government also supports research and community awareness raising efforts on the harmful
practice of FGM/C through the following mechanisms:
• Funding of $1.7 million over three years in the 2022-23 Budget through the Department of
Health and Aged Care to support community-led approaches for the prevention of FGM/C.
Initiatives will support community awareness of FGM/C; establish a community of practice for
health professionals; and support health workforce training to increase the Australian
workforce ability to address the health impacts of FGM/C.
• Exploring opportunities to undertake in-depth research on FGM/C as part of the 2023-24 suite
of projects under the AIC’s Violence against Women and Children (VAWC) Research
Program.
• The inclusion of a factsheet on FGM/C and other information on Australia’s laws regarding
family and domestic violence, sexual assault and forced marriage, and a woman’s right to be
safe in the Family Safety Pack provided by the Government for men and women coming to
Australia. The Pack is translated into 46 languages other than English.
• Funding for Lifeline Australia through DSS to deliver DV-alert, a free nationally accredited
training program designed to help health, allied health and community frontline workers better
understand and identify family and domestic violence and improve their referral and support
skills. DV-alert also offers specialised training streams including a stream on recognising
complex forms of violence that covers FGM/C.
56
Violence in diverse communities
Recommendation 35
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government fund research into the prevalence and
impact of family, domestic and sexual violence on children and young people, including:
• during the first one thousand days after birth; and
• from infancy to adolescence.
Supported
Following contributions to the first wave of the Australian Child Maltreatment Study (ACMS), the
Government has announced $22.4 million of funding for a second wave of the ACMS under the
National Strategy to Prevent and Respond to Child Sexual Abuse 2021-2030. The ACMS is Australia’s
first nationally representative study capturing prevalence data for each of the five types of child abuse
and neglect (physical abuse, sexual abuse, emotional abuse, neglect, and exposure to family and
domestic violence). This includes identifying the nature of the abuse and what age it occurs, as well as
associated long-term mental and physical health impacts.
In the October 2022-23 Budget, the Government provided $1.6 million over three years from 2022-23
for the extension of a second wave of the Australian Longitudinal Study on Women’s Health – Mothers
and their Children’s Health (MatCH) survey for 2022. The survey will collect time sensitive data on the
development of those children from the original 2015 study who are now aged 12-19 years, including
the adolescent experience of the COVID-19 pandemic and experiences of family and domestic
violence.
Further to this, ANROWS has identified children and young people as a priority topic in Australia’s
National Research Agenda to Reduce Violence against Women and their Children 2020-2022 (ANRA).
ANROWS has been delivering research on the prevalence and impact of FDSV on children and young
people through funding under the Fourth Action Plan of the former National Plan. Eight research
projects were commissioned under this research grant, including research on adolescent family
violence, young people with disability who use violence and service system responses and culturally
designed frameworks to address the needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children exposed to
FDSV. Five research projects have been completed, the remaining three are expected to be completed
by early-mid 2023.
The Government acknowledges the important work of ANROWS in leading the national FDSV
research agenda and has committed funding of $23 million over five years in the 2022-23 Budget for
ANROWS to continue its role in providing national leadership on data and evidence related to violence
against women and children.
Recommendation 36
The Committee recommends that, in accordance with National Priority Two of the Fourth Action Plan,
any family, domestic and sexual violence policies, programs and legislative frameworks which affect
Indigenous Australians must be co-designed by Indigenous peoples along with government. Similarly,
the evaluation of such policies, programs and legislative frameworks must be appropriately funded and
be designed with and led by Indigenous Australians working with government.
57
Supported
Closing the Gap is one of the cross-cutting principles underpinning all objectives under the National
Plan.
Under Closing the Gap Priority Reform One (formal partnerships and shared decision making), and
Priority Reform 4 (shared access to data and information), the Government is committed to working in
partnership with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples through shared-decision making and
formal partnerships. This includes by:
• Implementing the Uluru Statement from the Heart in full. This will include holding a
referendum to enshrine an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice in the
Australian Constitution, in the 2023-24 financial year. The Voice will be an independent,
representative body for First Nations peoples, and will provide a way for First Nations peoples
to have a greater say on the policies, programs and laws that affect them. For example, it will
advise on issues such as FDSV, childcare, native title, land rights, housing, and other policies
with a direct effect on First Nations peoples.
• Supporting the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Advisory Council to lead the development
of a dedicated Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Action Plan under the National Plan which
will address immediate family safety needs and establish the foundation for the future
standalone First Nations National Plan for family safety.
• Investing $10.7 million through the 2022-23 Budget for domestic violence services in the
Northern Territory.
• Investing $27.8 million over two years to extend First Nations family safety services, and
provide funding for up to 18 existing providers currently funded under the Third and Fourth
Action Plans of the former National Plan. The commitment includes an evaluation of program
activities.
• Investing $3 million to develop a program of capability-building measures for family safety
service providers. This program is being co-designed with First Nations family safety service
providers, with program design and evaluation to be undertaken by First Nations organisations
and in partnership with First Nations researchers.
• Committing to consulting with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities,
organisations, and peak bodies on implementation of Recommendation 9 of the Australian Law
Reform Commission’s final report Family Law for the future – An Inquiry into the Family Law
System (ALRC Report 135) which was agreed in principle. The recommendation suggests that
‘Section 4(1AB) of the Family Law Act 1975 (Cth) should be amended to provide a definition
of member of the family that is inclusive of any Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander concept of
family that is relevant in the particular circumstances of the case.’
Recommendation 37
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and territory governments work
to ensure the provision of appropriate funding for culturally specific Indigenous awareness programs for
all stakeholders in government, including police, service providers and the judiciary; to enable an
improved understanding of the particular challenges faced by Indigenous Australians affected by family,
domestic and sexual violence. This should include the options available to them for referral to Aboriginal
58
Community Controlled Organisations, whether they be victim-survivors or perpetrators.
Supported in principle
Under Closing the Gap Priority reform two (building the community sector) and Priority Reform Three
(transforming government organisations), the Government is committed to improving mainstream
institutions; ensuring they are culturally safe and responsive to the needs of First Nations people,
including through the services they fund. This includes:
• Funding organisations to provide culturally appropriate and accessible services for First
Nations peoples experiencing family violence through the Indigenous Advancement Strategy.
This includes funding the Indigenous Interpreters Service to assist community members in the
Northern Territory and Western Australia who access frontline services.
• Investing $3 million to build cultural safety in non-Indigenous family safety services and
referral systems who provide support to vulnerable First Nations clients. This program is being
co-designed with First Nations family safety service providers, with program design and
evaluation to be undertaken by First Nations organisations and in partnership with First Nations
researchers.
• Co-funding the AIJA to develop and maintain the National Domestic and Family Violence
Bench Book (Bench Book). The Bench Book is an online resource for judicial officers
considering legal issues relevant to family and domestic violence related matters. The Bench
Book recognises that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples may be at greater risk of
experiencing family and domestic violence and incorporates issues specific to First Nations
people.
• Funding the development of a National Bench Book on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Peoples and the Legal System. This Bench Book intends to improve access to, and delivery of,
quality, culturally appropriate justice and legal assistance services to First Nations peoples, by
better informing judicial officers and legal professionals about the cultural and legal issues
faced by First Nations peoples in the justice system and promoting best practice.
• Funding the NJCA to deliver the FVitC training program for judicial officers, which builds
upon the Bench Book. The Government has also committed to the development and delivery of
training for judicial officers on the nature and impacts of sexual assault. This training will
incorporate a focus on First Nations peoples’ experiences of sexual assault.
• Indigenous-led training on FDSV delivered through Lifeline Australia for Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander peoples. A nationally accredited 2-day workshop is available for frontline
workers to build their knowledge of violence in First Nations communities and be able to
respond in a culturally safe way. A free 2-hour Brothers Standing Tall workshop (non-
accredited) is also available for First Nations men over 16 years of age. The aim of this training
is to support men to learn and talk about family violence, its impact on First Nations families
and to assist them in reflecting on what they can do to prevent family violence in their
community.
The Government notes that police and the judiciary are state and territory government responsibilities.
State and territory and local governments will also need to address increasing access to culturally
specific Indigenous awareness programs for the police and judiciary through Closing the Gap Priority
Reforms and targets.
59
To support the states and territories, the Government has committed funding to enhance the
effectiveness of police responses to FDSV through the development and delivery of a national training
package. The intention is to ensure the measure includes content that recognises and addresses barriers
and increased risk factors to First Nations women and children experiencing FDSV, as well as
increasing law enforcement’s awareness of indicators to identify the more subtle forms of FDSV and
ways in which violence can manifest across extended family networks.
Recommendation 38
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and territory governments provide
additional training to police, General Practitioners, child health nurses, Remote Area Clinic nurses and
any other service providers that have contact with people in rural and remote areas to assist in the early
identification of family, domestic and sexual violence. Service personnel working in Indigenous
communities should receive appropriate Indigenous culturally aware training.
Supported
Strengthening the early intervention and response skills of those workforces who come into regular
contact with victim-survivors of FDSV is a key priority of the National Plan. Health sector workers
provide much of the frontline support for victim-survivors, and evidence shows a general practitioner
(GP) is often the first person a victim-survivor turns to for advice and support.7 It is critical that health
professionals are equipped to recognise and respond to signs of, or disclosures of FDSV, to prevent
experiences of violence being normalised and prevent re-traumatisation. It is also important mainstream
primary healthcare workers respond adequately to First Nations women experiencing violence.
The National Plan highlights the importance of building capacity in services responding to gender-
based violence, such as health, and increasing specialist and targeted training for police, the judiciary
and the legal profession, including information on coercive control and misidentification of the victim
as the perpetrator.
In relation to the health workforce, initiatives include:
• Working with the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners and the Australian
College of Rural and Remote Medicine to ensure quality, evidence-based training on FDSV is
provided.
• Consideration of options for enhancing FDSV training for healthcare workers as part of the
Government’s response to the Victorian Coroner’s Court’s investigation into the death of
Fatima Batool. Options will include mandatory training as part of the Continuing Professional
Development modules of GPs, psychiatrists and psychologists. These options will be presented
to the Health Ministerial Council in 2023.
• Funding to CRANAplus, the peak professional body for the remote and isolated health
workforce in Australia. CRANAplus supports health professionals working in remote areas, or
other circumstances of professional isolation, with education, training and professional
development opportunities, and mental health and wellbeing support, which could cover the
areas of FDSV.
• Funding for DV-alert until 2026-27 to provide training to community frontline workers to
recognise, respond and refer instances of family and domestic violence. The Government will
also continue to fund the Accredited Training for Sexual Violence Responses program,
60
building workforce capability of health professionals and frontline workers to better recognise
and respond to victims of sexual violence in a supported rights-based and autonomous fashion.
Training for both programs is available in regional and remote settings.
• Agreement through the National Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Agreement (the
National Agreement), which came into effect on 8 March 2022, to develop education and
reference materials to enhance the mental health and suicide prevention workforce’s
understanding of FDSV, including sexual harassment, and child maltreatment (Schedule A,
clause 6b). The National Agreement sets out the shared intention of the Australian Government
and states and territories to work in partnership to improve the mental health of all Australians,
while ensuring the sustainability and enhancing mental health and suicide prevention services.
• Consideration of the evaluation of the ‘Improving Health System Responses to Domestic and
Family Violence Primary Health Network’ pilots, which is due to be finalised in February
2023. The pilot was launched across 6 Public Health Networks in 2019 and expanded with
more primary care services in 2022. One of the key aims of the pilot is to enhance education
and training opportunities for primary care staff to better care for victim-survivors of family
and domestic violence.
• Working in partnership with First Nations experts to design, deliver and evaluate a resource for
use by health workers, which aims to increase health worker capability to engage in trauma-
aware, healing-informed, culturally appropriate first disclosure conversations with First Nations
victim-survivors of child sexual abuse, and support referral to specialist services, under the
National Strategy to Prevent and Respond to Child Sexual Abuse 2021-2030.
In relation to the criminal justice workforce, initiatives include:
• $4.1 million over four years from 2022-23 for the Attorney-General’s Department (AGD) to
develop and deliver a training package for police across Australia to enhance responses to
FDSV. This includes a focus on coercive control, technology facilitated abuse, child safety and
sexual assault. The training package will incorporate content relevant to rural/remote settings,
First Nations people, culturally and linguistically diverse communities, LGBTQIA+, and
people with a disability to capture the distinct needs and experiences of these cohorts.
• $0.4 million over five years ongoing was allocated to AGD in the October 2022-23 Budget for
the Commonwealth’s contribution to the maintenance of the National Domestic and Family
Violence Bench Book (Bench Book) and delivery of the FVitC training program for judicial
officers. The Bench Book is a resource for judicial officers in all Australian jurisdictions to
improve understanding of family violence and the FVitC training program builds on the Bench
Book by delivering face to-face training seminars across Australia.
• $0.9 million over four years from 2022-23 to develop training for legal practitioners on
coercive control. This training will build on work the Commonwealth is currently undertaking
with states and territories on the development of National Principles to Address Coercive
Control.
A further $3 million has been invested by the Government to build cultural safety in non-Indigenous
family safety services and referral systems who provide support to vulnerable First Nations clients. This
program is being co-designed with First Nations family safety service providers, with program design
and evaluation to by undertaken by First Nations organisations and in partnership with First Nations
researchers.
61
Recommendation 39
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and territory governments explore
opportunities to use technology to provide more services for victim-survivors and perpetrators in
regional, rural and remote areas.
Supported
The Government will consult with state and territory governments on implementation of this
recommendation. The Government supports the use of technology to provide more services for victim-
survivors and perpetrators, including those living in regional, rural and remote areas.
Current Government initiatives in the family law sector include:
• Exploring the use of technology to ensure that litigants in the family law system are able to
access legal advice and supports in a remote manner in Family Advocacy and Support Services
(FASS) locations.
DSS also funds No to Violence to work with men who use family violence, and the sector that supports
them, to change abusive and violent behaviour. Some of its programs use technology to provide
services, ensuring reach into regional, rural and remote areas. This includes:
• The Men’s Referral Service provides 24/7 counselling, information and referrals nationally
through its online and telephone service for men who are using violent an controlling
behaviour.
• The Brief Intervention Service provides short-term multi-session telephone support for men
who use family violence. While it is not available online, the phone service targets men who
are unable to access family violence support for a range of reasons, including due to living in
remote and regional areas.
• The Five Essential Discussion Tools provides online training to practitioners and counsellors
who are responding to men who use violence, ensuring that regardless of where the frontline
worker is located, they can access training.
In addition, $25 million over five years (2022-23 to 2026-27) will be provided to states and territories
to apply innovative approaches to address FDSV perpetrator behaviour. These approaches, which may
include technological solutions such as electronic monitoring, will help hold offenders to account,
prevent them from reoffending, and improve victim protection.
Initiatives that harness the use of technology to support victim-survivors include:
• Funding through the 2021-22 Budget for outreach services for at least seven domestic violence
unit locations under the National Legal Assistance Partnership (NLAP). This outreach may
include exploration of technology assisted mechanisms to ensure that women in regional, rural
and remote Australia are able to access Domestic Violence Unit (DVU) services. One example
of this is already operational in Victoria through an online DVU service.
• 1800RESPECT which is the national service that provides counselling, information and support
to people affected by FDSV. It is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The Government is
working with the current provider, Telstra Health, to improve and expand services for victim-
survivors and perpetrators in all communities including regional, rural and remote areas using
62
new technology. This includes additional SMS and Video Chat channels that will provide new
ways for victim-survivors in regional, rural and remote areas to engage and access support,
information and referrals provided by 1800RESPECT.
• $16.6 million over four years (2022-23 to 2025-26) for the eSafety Commissioner to develop a
a service that will provide practical advice, support and guidance to victim-survivors of
technology-facilitated abuse and the frontline workers who support them. It will work in
partnership with existing FDSV services and draw upon the latest strategies, techniques and
approaches. This measure responds to evidence which shows that over 99% of frontline family
and domestic violence workers have clients who have experienced technology-facilitated
abuse.8
• DV-alert is a free nationally accredited training program designed to help health, allied health
and community frontline workers better understand and identify domestic and family violence
and improve their referral and support skills. In response to COVID-19 restrictions, Lifeline
Australia adapted training materials to suit virtual delivery to ensure continuation of workshop
delivery during such a crucial time. Lifeline continue to deliver both face-to-face and virtual
workshops, using a hybrid model, converting some scheduled face-to-face workshops and
scheduling virtual sessions where appropriate.
Recommendation 40
The Committee recommends that, to improve data relevant to LGBTQI communities, the Australian
Government:
• develop guidelines for data collection about sexuality and gender as it relates to experiences of
violence, as part of government-funded research and service provision;
• include a question about LGBTQI identification in future Commonwealth censuses; and
• fund a national research project to examine the impact of family, domestic and sexual violence
affecting the LGBTQI community, and review best practice models to inform appropriate responses.
Supported in principle
The Government released a new statistical standard for Sex, Gender, Variations of Sex Characteristics
and Sexual Orientation in 2021 to guide collection of this data via the ABS.
The 2021 PSS will be collecting sexual orientation of respondents for the first time. Pending data
quality, the survey will be able to produce victimisation rates by sexual orientation for men and women
and investigate the characteristics and outcomes of violence for these cohorts. This will enable more
detailed reporting on LGBTIQA+ person’s experiences of violence.
The 2026 Census would be the next opportunity to collect LGBTIQA+ identification. The topics for the
2026 Census have not yet been determined by Government. The ABS provides advice and/or
recommendations to the Minister responsible for the ABS to inform the Government’s decision on
Census topics. The Census and Statistics Regulation 2016 (the Regulation) prescribes the topics in the
Census and LGBTIQA+ identification is not currently included. As normal practice, the ABS will
undertake community consultation on topics for the 2026 Census (commencing 28 February 2023) and
provide advice and/or recommendations to Government on any potential changes to Regulations
(expected in 2024). Proposed changes will be tabled and scrutinised to in both houses of Parliament
63
(expected in 2025) for final decision.
DSS will procure a LGBTIQA+ National Survey to provide benchmark data on prevalence, social
norms, attitudes, beliefs, bystander actions and help-seeking behaviour. The results of the survey will
enable sexual violence prevention projects to evaluate the effectiveness of their activities against the
benchmark. Research findings will be fed back to inform sexual violence prevention project
development, implementation and evaluation for LGBTIQA+ people.
Recommendation 41
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in cooperation with the states and
territories, develop and implement nationally consistent, regular and targeted education and training
within mainstream services, including police and paramedics, in relation to the nature, features and
dynamics of intimate partner violence and its particular impact on those from LGBTQI communities.
Supported in principle
The Government will consult with state and territory governments regarding this recommendation.
The National Plan explicitly includes LGBTIQA+ people and children as part of Australia’s
commitment to ending all forms of gender-based violence and promotes building the capacity of
service systems to respond to the needs of LGBTIQA+ people.
The Government will continue to fund DV-alert until 2026–27 to provide free, accredited training to
community frontline workers to recognise, respond and refer instances of family and domestic violence.
Training is being tailored to take a more inclusive approach and include information on how to support
male victim-survivors and people who identify as LGBTIQA+. This will be informed by the existing
evidence base, including the DSS-funded study Opening Doors: Ensuring LGBTIQ-inclusive family,
domestic and sexual violence services which was undertaken by La Trobe University. Training is
available to mainstream services, including police and paramedics.
Training for law enforcement will be developed as part of the Government’s $4.1 million training
package to enhance the effectiveness of police responses to all forms of FDSV, including intimate
partner violence. The training will be informed by the National Principles to Address Coercive Control
which will address the dynamics of coercive control and its particular effects on LGBTIQA+ people.
Training content will recognise barriers to LGBTIQA+ people seeking support and reporting to police
as well as risk factors for this cohort. Training will enhance law enforcement officers’ response to
incidents as well as increase their general awareness of indicators of subtle forms of FDSV and the
ways in which violence can manifest across extended family networks. This training will be developed
in consultation with the AFP with consideration of their existing training.
Recommendation 42
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government provide funding for Our Watch to update
its Change the Story framework to be inclusive, and to develop an LGBTQI specific prevention guide,
highlighting how gendered violence impacts LGBTQI communities in different ways compared to the
broader community.
Supported
In November 2021, Our Watch published an updated version of Change the Story which included a
review of recent evidence and stakeholder consultation. The updated framework considers the needs of
64
LGBTIQA+ communities and was funded by the Commonwealth, and state and territory governments.
The Government is also providing new funding of $104.4 million over five years to support Our Watch
to continue its primary prevention work. This funding will enable Our Watch to boost its efforts in
prevention for LGBTIQA+ people, women with disability and migrant women, and develop further
resources to educate young people about consent.
Recommendation 43
The Committee recommends that policies and programs relating to family, domestic and sexual violence
as it affects LGBTQI communities be developed in partnership between government agencies and
LGBTQI organisations.
Supported
The Government will continue to engage with LGBTIQA+ stakeholders to develop policies and
programs relating to FDSV that affect LGBTIQA+ communities.
The NPAG was established in June 2021 to provide advice to Government to inform development of
the National Plan. The NPAG includes membership from a broad range of organisations, including
those representing Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, women with disability, culturally
and linguistically diverse communities and the LGBTIQA+ community. The Government has engaged
with the NPAG regularly throughout the development of the National Plan.
The Government will continue to work closely with the NPAG as actions under the Action Plan are
developed and implemented.
With funding from the Government, LGBTIQ+ Health Australia (LHA) recently undertook research
and published a report, Opening Doors: Ensuring LGBTIQ-inclusive family, domestic and sexual
violence services, detailing research into FDSV services available for members of the LGBTIQ
community, and assessment of the appropriateness of these services. The findings of the project are
intended to educate service providers about the specific needs of the LGBTIQ community.
Current and proposed activities to support LGBTIQA+ people include three pilot projects to be
delivered and managed by LHA. The pilots were informed by a ‘think tank’ workshop and co-design
process led by LHA with member organisations and community representatives across Australia to
identify sexual violence prevention and harassment activities that met the specific needs of LGBTIQA+
and other sexuality, gender and bodily diverse people and communities. The pilots are: Peer support for
LGBTIQA+ people with disability experiencing isolation; Protecting personal autonomies of intersex
people; and Safety, Acceptance and Identity on country and LGBTIQA+ same-sex attracted, Two
Spirit, Sistergirl and Brotherboy Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander mob yarns.
Other activities include evaluation of the LGBTIQA+ Sexual Violence Prevention pilots, and a
LGBTIQA+ National Sexual Violence Prevention Survey. It is anticipated that the National Survey will
provide original benchmark data on prevalence, social norms, attitudes, beliefs, bystander actions and
help-seeking behaviour. The results of the survey would provide the opportunity for sexual violence
prevention projects to evaluate the effectiveness of their activities against these findings. Research
findings will be fed back to inform sexual violence prevention project development, implementation
and evaluation for LGBTIQA+ people.
65
Recommendation 44
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government ensure that the next National Plan specifies
people living with disability as a priority cohort, to ensure that legislation, policies and programs (across
all jurisdictions) include consultation to support specific consideration of the impacts on, and needs of,
these members of the community.
Supported
Consultations with stakeholders to inform the National Plan included targeted workshops on a broad
range of themes, facilitated by Monash University. One of these targeted workshops focused on
disability and gender-based violence. Findings from this workshop outlined the need for the National
Plan to:
• broaden the scope of FDSV to ensure it is inclusive of the forms of violence experienced by
people with disability;
• remove the language of vulnerability;
• adopt an intersectional approach that aims to address the policy and service system silos for
people with disability who experience violence;
• promote alignment with the rights contained in the UN Convention of the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities;
• acknowledge the service system gaps and barriers for people with disability who experience
violence and support improved service accessibility and trauma informed supports; and
• deliver training on identifying violence, assessing risk, and connecting people with disability
who are experiencing violence to relevant supports and services.
The National Plan recognises the specific experiences of gender-based violence experienced by women
with disability. This includes the specific forms of gender-based violence such as reproductive
coercion, forced sterilisation and forced medical interventions, as well as recognising women with
disability experience violence from a broader range of perpetrators.
The National Plan targets actions towards preventing and addressing violence against women with
disability across the continuum of prevention through to recovery and healing, including improving
service system gaps and accessibility, and ensuring services are equipped to identify and support
women and children experiencing, or at risk of experiencing gender-based violence.
The National Plan is also aligned with Australia’s Disability Strategy 2021-2031, which sets out
practical changes Australia can make to improve the lives of people with disability including that
people with disability are safe and feel safe from violence, abuse, neglect and exploitation.
The Disability Royal Commission, which commenced in 2019, will also provide guidance for future
work under the National Plan in ending violence against women and children with disability.
The National Plan also includes intersectionality as one of 6 cross-cutting principles, acknowledging
women and children are not a homogenous group and can have many and varied personal identities,
backgrounds, experiences and social positions.
66
Recommendation 45
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, together with the states and territories,
develop a national strategy, in consultation with people living with disability and their representative
organisations, to improve access to comprehensive, equitable, accessible, and disability-inclusive sexual
and reproductive health education and information.
Noted
This recommendation aligns with one of the policy priorities in Australia’s Disability Strategy 2021-
2031, which is that prevention and early intervention health services are timely, comprehensive,
appropriate and effective to support better overall health and wellbeing of people with disability.
The National Women’s Health Strategy 2020-2030 and National Men’s Health Strategy 2020-2030
recognise reproductive health as a priority focus for Australians across their life course, with both
strategies acknowledging people with disability as a priority population who may experience barriers to
good health and wellbeing. Increasing access to sexual and reproductive health care information,
diagnosis, treatment and services is a key priority in the National Women’s Health Strategy 2020-2030,
while increasing health literacy on sexual and reproductive health is a key action under objective 1 of
the National Men’s Health Strategy 2020-2030: empower and support men and boys to optimise their
own and each other’s health and wellbeing across all stages of their lives.
The National Roadmap for Improving the Health of People with Intellectual Disability (the Roadmap)
recognises the need to improve support for people with intellectual disability and their families and
carers. The Roadmap includes a short-term action for the Commonwealth to work with Primary Health
Networks (PHN), the National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA) and other advocacy organisations
to better promote mental health and reproductive health services to people with intellectual disability,
and connect existing services to a National Centre of Excellence in Intellectual Disability Health (the
National Centre). In the October 2022 Budget, the Commonwealth committed to establishing the
National Centre.
On 28 September 2022, the Senate referred an inquiry into universal access to reproductive healthcare
to the Senate Community Affairs References Committee for report by 11 May 2023. The Government
will consider the need for further action to improve access to comprehensive, equitable, accessible, and
disability-inclusive sexual and reproductive health education and information in response to this
inquiry.
Recommendation 46
The Committee recommends that National Disability Insurance Agency staff (including planners and
those with decision making delegation) and disability service workers funded by the National Disability
Insurance Scheme (NDIS) complete mandatory training in identifying and responding to family,
domestic and sexual violence affecting people with disability.
Supported in principle
The National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA) upholds the Commonwealth, state and territory
governments’ shared responsibility for effectively responding to FDSV and is committed to ensuring
the safety of all Australians, including those with disability.
The NDIA has committed to developing a policy on participant safeguarding, which will guide the
67
work of the Agency and Partners to support people with disability, including those who may be
experiencing FDSV, to make informed decisions about their own safety and safeguards in their life.
The policy will articulate roles and responsibilities of the NDIA and others within the broader NDIS
service and support system responsible for promoting and upholding the safety of people with
disability. This includes the role of the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission (NDIS Commission)
in building the capability of disability service workers and NDIS providers to identify and respond to
risks of harm to participants through appropriate training.
In developing this policy, consideration will be given to evidence-based research, the experiences of
people with disability and engagement with other key stakeholders including families and carers, the
disability sector, NDIS providers and NDIA staff. The policy will be updated to incorporate any
changes emerging from the review of the NDIS Quality and Safeguarding Framework (the NDIS
Framework) and the work of the Disability Royal Commission.
To support NDIA staff members who may be experiencing family and domestic violence, the NDIA
has developed an eLearning module on Family and Gender Based Violence Prevention and provides all
staff with access to external training that supports understanding of family and domestic violence. The
NDIA also has a network of Peer Support Officers who have undergone specific training on supporting
colleagues who may be experiencing Family and Domestic Violence.
Recommendation 47
The Committee recommends that, to support the implementation of the above recommendations, the
Australian Government, in cooperation with the states and territories, implement national uniform
legislation establishing mandatory reporting by registered disability service providers to police and the
proposed National Commissioner for the prevention of family, domestic and sexual violence of all
incidents of violence perpetrated against people living with disability, whether in residential care facilities
or people’s own homes.
Supported in principle
The NDIS Framework provides for a national mandatory serious incident-reporting scheme for
registered NDIS providers.
The NDIS Commission was established to give effect to the Commonwealth’s responsibilities under the
NDIS Framework. The NDIS Commission’s functions include a ‘reportable incident function’ relating
to the notification and oversight of providers responses to serious incidents and allegations affecting
NDIS participants which have occurred in connection with the provision of an NDIS support or service.
The requirement to report is a condition of registration for all registered NDIS providers.
A reportable incident (including allegations of an incident) is defined in the legislation and pertains to:
be a death, serious injury, abuse or neglect, unlawful sexual or physical contact, assault, sexual
misconduct or the use of unauthorised restrictive practices. The obligation to report involves incidents,
including allegations, in any setting that an NDIS support or service is delivered.
The reportable incident scheme does not mandate reporting to police by registered NDIS providers in
all instances, however it is expected that providers will report matters to police where there is an
allegation of criminal conduct involved with the incident, including violence, abuse, neglect or
exploitation of a person with disability.
Reporting to the NDIS Commission does not replace existing obligations on NDIS providers to report
suspected crimes to the police or other relevant authorities. If this has not occurred, the NDIS
68
Commission may make contact with Police, or instruct the provider to make contact. Referrals made by
the NDIS Commission to other bodies include referrals to coroners, state or territory Ombudsman, or
mental health authorities.
The National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013 allows for protected NDIS Commission
information to be disclosed to Commonwealth and state and territory bodies for the purposes of
performing their functions providing certain obligations are met around the use of that information. It
should be noted that at this time, some state and territory bodies have expressed concerns about the way
these disclosure provisions operate and legislative amendment is currently under consideration.
Recommendation 48
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan be more inclusive of people from culturally and
linguistically diverse communities, their experiences and their needs.
Supported
The National Plan acknowledges women from culturally, ethnically, religiously and linguistically
diverse communities as a priority cohort and recognises they experience specific forms of violence such
as migration-related abuse, dowry abuse, forced marriage, FGM/C and trafficking of girls. Further, the
National Plan recognises women from these communities face specific challenges in seeking support
and reporting violence such as the absence of trusted social networks and/or families in Australia and
linguistic and cultural barriers.
The National Plan will include actions aimed at preventing and addressing violence against women
from culturally, ethnically, religiously and linguistically diverse communities across the continuum of
prevention through to recovery and healing.
Recommendation 49
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government focus on providing more, and more
effective, culturally appropriate education on family, domestic and sexual violence to culturally and
linguistically diverse communities.
Supported
There is a range of Government programs that provide culturally appropriate education on FDSV to
culturally and linguistically diverse communities. One such example includes the Family Safety Pack
for men and women coming to Australia. It includes information on Australia’s laws regarding
domestic and family violence, sexual assault and forced marriage, and a woman’s right to be safe, and
has been translated into 46 languages.
The Humanitarian Settlement Program supports humanitarian entrants and other eligible visa holders
during their initial settlement. It helps new arrivals integrate into Australian life by building the skills
and knowledge they need to become self-reliant and active members of the community. Activities
include orientation and information provision about Australia’s law regarding family and domestic
violence, safety planning and supported referrals to family violence support services.
In addition, the Settlement Engagement and Transition Support program aims to equip and empower
humanitarian entrants, other eligible permanent migrants and their communities to address their
settlement needs, in order to improve social participation, economic well-being, independence, personal
well-being and community connectedness. Activities include information sessions focusing on
69
women’s health, domestic violence awareness and family safety.
Under the former National Plan, funding was provided for resources, support services and programs for
culturally and linguistically diverse communities including:
• The Fathering Across Cultures website; DV-alert culturally and linguistically diverse program
modules; translated resources for the Stop it at the Start and Help is Here campaigns; the
Family Safety Pack (8 factsheets, translated into 46 languages); the My Blue Sky website
dedicated to forced marriage prevention, information and free legal advice; and the NETFA
website.
• Access to interpreters for national telephone support services such as 1800RESPECT and
MensLine.
Currently 37 organisations are funded until 30 June 2024 to deliver programs primarily focused on
prevention-based activities that respond to the unique needs of culturally and linguistically diverse
communities.
Additionally, in the October 2022–23 Budget, $104.4 million was provided to continue and expand the
role of Our Watch, Australia’s national leader for the primary prevention of gender-based violence, to
broaden its reach in diverse populations including LGBTIQA+, disability and culturally and
linguistically diverse communities.
The National Plan recognises that services and materials need to be produced in language to build the
knowledge, skills and awareness of culturally and linguistically diverse communities and to reduce
barriers to seeking support. The Government will apply lessons from current education programs on
violence prevention to ensure future work is effective and community led.
Recommendation 50
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, and state and territory governments,
provide a specifically funded resource to assist larger multicultural organisations to enhance family,
domestic and sexual violence service delivery for culturally and linguistically diverse communities.
Supported in principle
The Government is implementing the 2021-22 Budget measure to promote the safety and social
inclusion of refugee and other migrant women through a boost in funding to the Settlement
Engagement and Transition Support Program.
The National Plan has a focus on incorporating an understanding and appropriate response to the
specific challenges women from diverse cultural, ethnic, religious and linguistic backgrounds and
migrant and refugee women and children, including those on temporary visas, face in relation to FDSV.
The National Plan highlights the need for culturally appropriate services and supports for diverse
communities, including tailored and culturally-safe services, and system responses are available to men
who seek to address their use of violence.
Specific focus areas for action under the National Plan include:
70
• supporting settlement services, multicultural, ethno-specific and faith-based organisations to
identify and respond to women, children and LGBTIQA+ people at risk of gender-based
violence.
• building the capacity of cultural and faith-based services to work with specialist family
violence services in providing family violence support, including identification and response.
The October 2022–23 Budget provided for $169.4 million over four years to fund an additional 500
community services workers to assist women experiencing violence, of which at least 60 will be for
organisations assisting culturally and linguistically diverse women and children.
Recommendation 51
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and, where applicable, state and territory
governments, make the following changes to immigration legislation and procedures:
• amend the Migration Act 1958 to prevent ‘consequential visa cancellation’ where a victim-
survivor of family violence has their visa cancelled due to domestic violence perpetrated against them by
the primary visa holder;
• where a visa applicant is in crisis or temporary accommodation, create an exception to the
requirement that a residential address is required to lodge a valid protection visa application;
• address official correspondence related to visa applications to each individual applicant, so that
if one of them leaves the family home, the correspondence can then be re-directed to a new address;
• provide access to legal services, specialist police services and income support for a broader range
of temporary visa holders who are victim-survivors of family violence, and consider revisions to
migration regulations to offer legal protection to victim-survivors on temporary visas;
• broaden the definition of family violence in the Migration Regulations 1994 to be consistent with
the Family Violence Protection Act 2008 (Vic) and to ensure that people seeking to escape violence are
entitled to crisis payments, regardless of their visa status;
• exempt women on temporary visas and women seeking asylum who have experienced family
and domestic violence from meeting residency requirements for the purposes of access to Centrelink and
Medicare while their visa is being processed; and
• review and amend the eligibility requirements for victim-survivors of violence to access financial
and other crisis supports, particularly for those on temporary visas.
Noted
The Government is committed to supporting all victim-surivors of FDSV, including those on
permanent or temporary visas. The Department of Home Affairs will work with victim-survivors to
resolve their situation under the migration law framework.
Consequential visa cancellation
General cancellation provisions enact, by operation of law, mandatory consequential cancellation
provisions (section 140(1) of the Migration Act), which mean that if the primary visa holder’s visa is
cancelled, including because they were convicted of FDSV related offences, the secondary visa
71
holder’s visa will also be cancelled. Where the Department of Home Affairs is aware of the fact that the
secondary applicant is a victim-survivor of FDSV, delegates are instructed to take into account the
impact of the decision on the victim-survivor in their decision making. This consideration is balanced
against the protection of the Australian community.
The Migration Regulations contain the Family Violence Provisions which allow Partner visa applicants
in Australia to be granted permanent residence if their relationship has broken down and they have
suffered domestic or family violence perpetrated by the sponsor. For those on temporary visas where
the Family Violence Provisions do not apply, the Government’s policy is that the visa held by the
victim-survivor should not be cancelled because their relationship broke down due to domestic or
family violence. This provides the visa holder with the flexibility to allow them to make arrangements
to depart Australia or apply for another visa. The Department of Home Affairs is committed to working
with victim-survivors of domestic or family violence to resolve their visa situation under the migration
law framework.
Residential address requirements
While protection visa applicants, as with all other visa applicants, are required to provide the
Department of Home Affairs with their residential address, this address is not limited to where the
client is actually residing and could, for example, be the client’s migration agent’s address. Where
confidential addresses are provided to the Department of Home Affairs, these are stored in systems
with a ‘confidential address’ flag.
Official correspondence related to visa applications
In the Partner visa program, as soon as the Department of Home Affairs becomes aware that a Partner
visa applicant/application is affected by a breakdown in the relationship, the case is fast tracked for
priority action. Among other actions, this will include removing the Partner application from
ImmiAccount to prevent possible access/privacy breaches, as the sponsor is no longer party to the
application. The Department of Home Affairs contacts the client to advise that their ImmiAccount has
been closed, explain the next steps, and obtain their new contact details if not already provided with the
Relationship Breakdown notification. No correspondence is sent out to an applicant until this process is
completed. The Department of Home Affairs continues to review and improve these processes.
Access to support services for temporary visa holders
The Government provides support to reduce financial and other barriers temporary visa holders face
when experiencing violence through the national, two-year Temporary Visa Holders Experiencing
Violence Pilot (the Pilot). Under the Pilot, temporary visa holders experiencing family and domestic
violence are eligible for financial assistance of up to $3,000 and legal assistance to address their
migration, family law and family and domestic violence matters. As part of the October 2022 Budget,
the Government committed an additional $12.6 million to the Pilot, bringing the total investment from
2020-21 to 2023-24 to $34.1 million.
For those on temporary visas, the Department of Home Affairs’ role is to work with affected
individuals to resolve their situation under the migration framework. In 2021, the Government invested
$2.5 million to support temporary visa holders experiencing FDSV, through the establishment of a
dedicated family and domestic violence support team within the Department of Home Affairs on a two
year pilot basis. This team provides a centralised point of contact, triages visa support for victim-
survivors of family and domestic violence with a view to assist them to regularise their visa status
under the migration law framework, and gathers and analyses data to inform future policy responses.
72
The Government’s policy is that the temporary visa held by the victim-survivor should not be cancelled
because their relationship broke down due to family and domestic violence. This provides the visa
holder with the flexibility to allow them to make arrangements to depart Australia or apply for another
visa. The Department of Home Affairs is committed to working with victim-survivors of family and
domestic violence to resolve their visa situation under the migration law framework.
The Department of Home Affairs continues to review the appropriateness of existing visa settings and
consider measures to further support victims of FDSV. On 20 August 2022, amendments to the
Migration Regulations came into effect to enable offshore Partner visa applicants, who have been, or
are eligible to be, granted a visa in Australia under a COVID-19 visa concession, to access the family
violence provisions.
Definition of family violence in the Migration Regulations
The Family Violence Protection Act 2008 (Vic) includes economic abuse and coercive behaviour as a
form of family violence. The Migration Regulations define relevant family violence in broad terms.
The Government notes that the Department of Home Affairs’ Procedural Instructions already state that
‘relevant family violence' as defined under regulation 1.21 of the Regulations is not limited to physical
harm, and includes other forms of abuse such as psychological and financial abuse. This would capture
a range of economic and coercive behaviour related abuse, if it would cause the alleged victim-survivor
to reasonably fear for, or be reasonably apprehensive about their own wellbeing or safety, consistent
with regulation 1.21.
Centrelink and Medicare residency requirements
Australia has a residence-based social security system, which is designed primarily to support
Australian citizens and permanent residents. Most temporary visa holders do not have access to
Australian social security payments paid through Services Australia (Centrelink). Holders of certain
temporary visa holders may have access to some payments, such as Special Benefit and Family Tax
Benefit, where eligible, including in cases of family and domestic violence. This includes temporary
partner visa holders, temporary humanitarian visa holders and New Zealand citizens on Special
Category Visas. Temporary visa holders experiencing family and domestic violence can also access
support through the Temporary Visa Holders Experiencing Violence Pilot.
Medicare provides free treatment for public patients in public hospitals, subsidised medicines through
the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme and the payment of benefits (or ‘rebates’) for medical services
listed on the Medicare Benefits Schedule.
The Health Insurance Act 1973 governs who is eligible for Medicare. Eligibility for Medicare is
generally restricted to people who permanently reside in Australia and are either: Australian citizens;
New Zealand citizens; permanent visa holders; or applicants for a permanent visa in certain
circumstances. Temporary visa holders are generally ineligible for Medicare.
The National Health Reform Agreement recognises that state and territory governments are the
managers of their public hospital systems. They have responsibility for determining the policy and
arrangements for the provision of public hospital and health services to non-Medicare eligible persons.
As such, decisions about the provision of free public healthcare in circumstances such as these is a
matter for the individual state and territory public health system.
Medicare ineligible patients receiving public health and hospital services may be charged an amount as
determined by the relevant state and territory government responsible for the administration of their
public hospital system.
73
Eligibility requirements for financial and other crisis supports
In 2021, the Government established a two-year trial of the Escaping Violence Payment (EVP) to
provide financial assistance to victim-survivors leaving a violent intimate partner relationship to
establish a home free from violence. The EVP provides victim-survivors with individualised financial
assistance packages of up to $5,000, including up to $1,500 in cash or cash equivalents and the
remaining funds provided in goods, services and supports. The payment has broad eligibility criteria
and is available to Australian citizens and permanent residents who are over 18 years old, have recently
experienced intimate partner violence, have a changed living situation and are experiencing financial
stress. Unlike some other Government-funded services and programs, it is not limited to individuals in
receipt of social security benefits.
It is important to note that the delivery of support services in each jurisdiction, including eligibility
requirements, is the responsibility of state and territory governments.
Recommendation 52
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan provide funding to investigate the prevalence
and prevention of elder abuse, both in residential care facilities and in people’s own homes, whether by
facility staff, carers or family members.
Noted
The National Plan to Respond to the Abuse of Older Australians (Elder Abuse) 2019-2023 (Plan) was
launched in 2019. The Plan was developed in collaboration with state and territory governments and
provides an overview of the issues that all governments need to act on as a priority, as well as early
agreed actions to address them.
As part of the Plan, AGD commissioned the Australian Institute of Family Studies (AIFS) to conduct
Australia's first national study into the prevalence of elder abuse (National Elder Abuse prevalence
study). The prevalence study was publicly released in December 2021, and investigated the prevalence
and characteristics of elder abuse in relation to older persons living in the community. Findings from
the prevalence study are being used to inform policy and program design, at the Commonwealth, state
and territory level, to protect older Australians.
The Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission (ACQS Commission) receives reports on certain types
of elder abuse as part of the Serious Incident Response Scheme (SIRS). SIRS commenced on 1 April
2021 for residential aged care providers and from 1 December 2022, also applies to providers of home
care and flexible care delivered in home and community settings. Providers must notify the ACQS
Commission if a reportable incident occurs, or is alleged or suspected to have occurred, in relation to an
older Australian that is receiving care or services from the provider. There are 8 types of reportable
incidents, including neglect, unreasonable use of force and psychological or emotional abuse. SIRS
aims to build the skills of providers so they can better manage, respond to, and prevent incidents.
Reportable incidents that must be reported to the ACQS Commission are incidents caused by a
provider’s staff members (including volunteers) or another care recipient within the provider’s care, but
does not extend to incidents caused by carers or family members.
The ACQS Commission publishes information on the number of reportable incident notifications
received in its quarterly Sector Performance reports. The ACQS Commission’s Sector Performance
reports also include information on the number of complaints received each quarter, which is broken
down into residential and home care settings and also the top 10 complaint categories. The ACQS
74
Commission’s complaints handling process provides an avenue for older Australians dissatisfied with
Government funded aged care services. The ACQS Commission’s resolution approach may involve
provider resolution, conciliation, mediation or investigation depending on the nature of the complaint.
The Government has committed to establishing a complaints commissioner role within the ACQS
Commission to assist in driving a more effective and timely complaints resolution process for older
Australians and their families.
Recommendation 53
The Committee recommends that the Department of Health release all de-identified data and information
pertaining to incidents and allegations of sexual assault in residential aged care, including incidents where
the perpetrator was alleged to have had a cognitive or mental impairment.
Noted
The ACQS Commission publicly releases information on the number of reportable incident
notifications received as part of its quarterly Sector Performance Reports, which are available on the
Commission’s website. The information is separated into the type of reportable incident and whether
the incident was reported as a priority 1 incident or a priority 2 incident. From 3 October 2022 any
incident involving unlawful sexual contact or inappropriate sexual conduct must be reported as a
priority 1 incident.
The ACQS Commission reviews all incident notifications within 24 hours of receipt and takes
appropriate action where there is an ongoing risk of harm to consumers and/or where the aged care
provider has not dealt with the incident appropriately. Notifying the Commission of serious incidents
does not replace the provider’s obligations to report to police any incident that involves criminal or
potentially criminal behaviour. The ACQS Commission’s Sector Performance reports include
information on regulatory and enforcement actions taken by the ACQS Commission against providers
relating to reportable incidents, however this is not separated according to the type of reportable
incident that occurred.
The collection and publication of information on reportable incident notifications is an important
transparency and continuous improvement measure that helps providers maintain a focus on promoting
quality and safety of their care services through incident prevention and response. Over time, this
increased transparency will assist in building public confidence in the aged care system. This
information is being reviewed and monitored alongside the commencement of other aged care reforms
to provide an overview on improvements to the quality and safety of aged care services across
Australia.
Recommendation 54
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government commission research into the prevalence
of family, domestic and sexual violence against men and its impact on male victim-survivors. The
research should include a focus on any connections between male victim-survivors and their exposure to
family, domestic and sexual violence as children.
The Committee further recommends that the Department of Social Services review the adequacy of
advice and referral services for men as victim-survivors of family, domestic and sexual violence.
Supported
75
The National Plan acknowledges men’s experience of FDSV and points to the importance of all people
experiencing FDSV, including men, being supported to access services and to leave violent
relationships if and when they choose to do so.
Alongside other factors, childhood exposure to family and domestic violence has been linked to future
perpetration.9
The Government commissions and funds the Australian Longitudinal Study on Male Health (Ten to
Men), a longitudinal study of males aged 10 to adulthood designed to help improve the health and
wellbeing of men and boys.
In addition, the Australian Longitudinal Study on Women’s Health – Mothers and their Children’s
health (MatCH) survey collects important health data on women and children and can be used to
understand whether a mother’s experience of violence can impact their children and have a lasting
effect on boys growing up to men.
The PSS also captures data on violence against men and women.
DSS, in consultation with ANROWS, will consider reviewing the adequacy of advice and referral
services for men as victim-survivors of FDSV. DSS undertakes ongoing reviews of how its programs
support different groups.
76
Primary prevention
Recommendation 55
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan continue with the core philosophy of primary
prevention being key to reducing family, domestic and sexual violence.
Supported
Primary prevention remains central to the overarching vision of ending violence against women and
children in one generation in the National Plan. Prevention is one of four domains (in addition to Early
Intervention, Response and Recovery and healing) for action.
The National Plan outlines 8 objectives under the Prevention domain including:
• Challenging the condoning of violence against women and embedding prevention activities
across sectors and settings.
• Advancing gender equality and promoting women’s independence and decision-making in
public life and relationships.
• Strengthening positive, equal and respectful relationships between all people in public and
private spheres.
• Listening to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander voices.
• Supporting men and boys in developing healthy masculinities and positive, supportive
relationships with their male peers.
• Harnessing technology in the prevention of violence against women and children.
• Investing in making workplaces safe and preventing sexual harassment.
• Elevating the voices of children and young people as victim-survivors in their own right.
Recommendation 56
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, with state and territory governments,
provide increased funding for developmentally appropriate primary prevention campaigns, including
protective behaviour education, to inform respectful attitudes around sexual consent, with an emphasis
on community education, particularly young people in schools. This should include funding for Our
Watch for the entire life of the next National Plan, so as to provide the organisation with greater certainty
and program continuity.
Supported in principle
The Government is committed to supporting education and primary prevention campaigns in line with
Change the Story, the nationally recognised evidence-based framework for primary prevention,
developed by Our Watch.
The Government has committed the following funding for the development of appropriate primary
prevention campaigns and initiatives to inform respectful attitudes around sexual consent.
77
• $40 million over five years for a consent campaign to inform young people and the adults in
their lives about consent and respectful relationships. This campaign aims to reduce the
incidence of sexual violence.
• $5 million over two years to conduct a national survey of secondary school-age students’
understanding of consent. The results will inform the Government’s work on respectful
relationships and national prevention strategies.
• $104.4 million over five years for Our Watch, the leading primary prevention organisation, so
it can continue its work. Our Watch currently delivers The Line, its social marketing campaign
to promote respectful relationships among young people by providing evidence-based
information on issues such as dating and consent.
In addition, the Government, through its $83.5 million Consent and Respectful Relationships Education
measure (2022-23 to 2027-28), will partner with states, territories, and non-government school systems
in early 2023 to support schools to deliver high quality, age-appropriate, evidence-based respectful
relationships education and protective behaviours programs in states and territories, to help prevent
violence and keep children safe.
Recommendation 57
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government support national research and awareness
raising campaigns into sexist advertising and the negative effects of unequal gender representation.
Supported in principle
Advertising regulation in Australia is intended to strike a balance between legitimate commercial
interests and appropriate community safeguards. The Australian Government has responsibility for
broadcasting and online services. Advertising in outdoor settings, including train stations, stadiums, and
billboards, is the responsibility of states and territories.
Most content broadcast in Australia is regulated by co-regulatory codes of practice developed by
broadcasting industry sectors in accordance with the Broadcasting Services Act 1992. This
co-regulatory system recognises the importance of television and radio content reflecting community
standards, including around alcohol and gambling promotions. These codes are periodically reviewed
by the relevant broadcasting sector and the Australian Communications and Media Authority.
Additionally, the content of advertisements is required to comply with the self-regulatory codes of
practice developed by the Australian Association of National Advertisers (AANA), including the
AANA Code of Ethics. The Codes are platform neutral (including broadcast platforms, outdoor media
and social media) and adapt to keep pace with changing consumer expectations. The AANA Code of
Ethics contains provisions relating to taste and decency, including requirements that advertising or
marketing communication shall not depict material contrary to prevailing community standards on
health and safety.
Our Watch’s National Media Engagement initiative promotes the responsible and ethical reporting of
violence against women by working with media outlets and journalists to increase awareness of issues
with reporting on violence against women and embed best practice reporting. Activities include an Our
Watch Fellowship which brings together media professionals to further develop and expand their
knowledge and understanding, guidance to media professionals in the form of a tip sheet on reporting
sexual harassment and sexual assault including incidents within the workplace, and encouraging
78
increased engagement of journalists and media professionals with Media Making Change (free online
resources to promote gender equality).
The Government is committed to a program of work to modernise media regulations and fulfil the
legitimate expectations of consumers and industry for consistency, transparency and equity in our
regulatory environment.
Recommendation 58
Recognising that the principal drivers of family, domestic and sexual violence are gender inequality and
stereotypical attitudes towards gender roles, characteristics and behaviour, together with disrespect of
girls and women, the Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider establishing a
gender equality strategy.
Supported
Gender equality is at the heart of the Australian Government’s vision for a better future. The
Government has committed to deliver a National Strategy to Achieve Gender Equality (National
Strategy) in 2023. The National Strategy will guide whole-of-government action to elevate and
prioritise actions to achieve gender equality. It will act as a framework for policy changes required to
drive gender equality in Australia. The National Strategy will support the Government’s commitment to
improve women’s economic equality, health and wellbeing.
The Office for Women will develop the National Strategy in consultation with women and girls
around Australia, with a focus on ensuring that diverse voices are heard and included. It will
complement other efforts to support gender equality, including the National Plan, implementation of
recommendations from Respect@Work: Sexual Harassment National Inquiry Report (2020)
(Respect@Work report), and the National Women’s Health Strategy 2020–2030.
Recommendation 59
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with the states and territories to ensure
that age-appropriate respectful relationships are taught in all Australian schools and early education
settings.
Supported
The Government is committed to working in partnership with states and territories and non-government
school systems to deliver high quality, age appropriate, evidence-based respectful relationships
education nationally.
As part of this commitment, the Government is investing $83.5 million over six years. The first stage is
to establish a National Respectful Relationships Education Expert Working Group with representation
from government and non-government education sectors, and experts to guide program design and
advise schools on delivery that suits the needs of their school community. The Working Group will
oversee:
• a rapid review of how consent education programs are currently being delivered in schools to
establish what works and identify gaps; and
79
• the development of a national accreditation framework or guide to provide assurance to school
communities that they are delivering and receiving high quality evidence-based consent and
respectful relationships education programs.
The Government recognises that a partnership approach to consent and respectful relationship
education will strengthen, and support implementation of evidence based and age appropriate programs
in schools, while also acknowledging that the delivery of respectful relationships education in schools
is the responsibility of state and territory governments, non-government education authorities and
individual schools.
Recommendation 60
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan adopt a public health approach to preventing
and managing drug and alcohol related harms experienced by families and children, involving all
jurisdictions, including local governments.
Supported in principle
The National Plan recognises the complex interplay of gender-based violence and alcohol, drugs and
mental health, and highlights the need for services to be appropriately equipped to support victim-
survivors.
The Government’s approach to managing drug and alcohol related harms is outlined in the National
Drug Strategy 2017-2026 and the National Alcohol Strategy 2019-2028. The National Plan aligns to
these strategies to ensure victim-survivors are able to access longer-term recovery and support in
relation to drug and alcohol related harms.
80
Early intervention and behaviour change
Recommendation 61
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan include measures to support the social services
sector (including the health, mental health, disability, family and relationships, and alcohol and other
drugs sectors) to have a greater role in identifying and responding to family, domestic and sexual
violence.
These measures should include but not be limited to:
• training for all staff in identifying family, domestic and sexual violence and working with
perpetrators;
• measures to support increased information sharing about perpetrators; and
• measures to support a more consistent national approach to risk assessment and risk management.
Supported
The National Plan recognises the need for a strong workforce comprised of people with the skills to
prevent and respond to gender-based violence across all four domains of prevention, early intervention,
response and recovery and healing. This includes workers outside the specialist FDSV sector, such as
workers in the criminal justice system, healthcare, and educational institutions among others.
The National Plan highlights the importance of integrating education on the drivers of gender-based
violence, and how to respond to and report it, into the foundational training of the non-specialist
workforce as part of gaining their qualifications. Beyond receiving foundational training, non-specialist
workers should also receive ongoing, expert training and learning and development on preventing and
responding to gender-based violence.
Initiatives the Government is implementing to support the social services sector to have a greater role in
identifying and responding to FDSV include:
• Consideration of options for enhancing FDSV training for healthcare workers as part of the
Government’s response to the Victorian Coroner’s Court’s investigation into the death of
Fatima Batool. Options will include mandatory training as part of the Continuing Professional
Development modules of GPs, psychiatrists and psychologists. These options will be presented
to the Health Ministerial Council in 2023.
• Funding to CRANAplus, the peak professional body for the remote and isolated health
workforce in Australia. CRANAplus supports health professionals working in remote areas, or
other circumstances of professional isolation, with education, training and professional
development opportunities, and mental health and wellbeing support, which could cover the
areas of FDSV.
• Funding for DV-alert until 2026-27 to provide training to community frontline workers to
recognise, respond and refer instances of family and domestic violence. The Government will
also continue to fund the Accredited Training for Sexual Violence Responses program,
building workforce capability of health professionals and frontline workers to better recognise
and respond to victims of sexual violence in a supported rights-based and autonomous fashion.
81
• Agreement through the National Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Agreement (the
National Agreement), which came into effect on 8 March 2022, to develop education and
reference materials to enhance the mental health and suicide prevention workforce’s
understanding of FDSV, including sexual harassment, and child maltreatment (Schedule A,
clause 6b). The National Agreement sets out the shared intention of the Australian Government
and states and territories to work in partnership to improve the mental health of all Australians,
while ensuring the sustainability and enhancing mental health and suicide prevention services.
• Consideration of the evaluation of the ‘Improving Health System Responses to Domestic and
Family Violence Primary Health Network’ pilots, which is due to be finalised in February
2023. The pilot was launched across 6 Public Health Networks in 2019 and expanded with
more primary care services in 2022. One of the key aims of the pilot is to enhance education
and training opportunities for primary care staff to better care for victim-survivors of family
and domestic violence.
• Working in partnership with First Nations experts to design, deliver and evaluate a resource for
use by health workers, which aims to increase health worker capability to engage in trauma-
aware, healing-informed, culturally appropriate first disclosure conversations with First Nations
victim-survivors of child sexual abuse, and support referral to specialist services, under the
National Strategy to Prevent and Respond to Child Sexual Abuse 2021-2030.
• A further $3 million to build cultural safety in non-Indigenous family safety services and
referral systems who provide support to vulnerable First Nations clients. This program is being
co-designed with First Nations family safety service providers, with program design and
evaluation to by undertaken by First Nations organisations and in partnership with First Nations
researchers.
Recommendation 62
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan include measures to leverage the existing
network of Primary Health Networks to improve the identification and response to family, domestic and
sexual violence in general practices. These should include consideration of a national rollout of the
Recognise, Respond, Refer program, subject to a positive evaluation of the current trial.
Supported in principle
Under the National Plan, effective intervention approaches will be embedded in a variety of settings
and sectors, including healthcare. The National Plan recognises general practitioners are often the first
point of contact for victim-survivors seeking advice and support, and emphasises the need to build
capacity in services, including general practice, to identify and respond to FDSV.
The Recognise, Respond, Refer (RRR) program was developed by the Brisbane South PHN in
partnership with the Australian Centre of Social Innovation. The RRR program relies upon the
expertise of GPs and other primary health care professionals to identify the early signs of FDSV and
connects GPs and their patients to FDSV referral networks. The RRR program includes whole-of-
organisation training provided by FDSV specialists free of charge to general practices in the PHN
region. Under the Fourth Action Plan of the former National Plan, the then Government provided $7.5
million to expand the existing RRR program and pilot new family and domestic violence programs at
five additional PHNs from 2019-20 to 2021-22. An evaluation of the existing RRR program and the
pilot models is underway with the final evaluation report to be provided to Government in February
2023.
82
In the 2022-23 Budget, the Government announced it will be investing a further $48.7 million over four
years from 2022-23 to 2025-26 to support victim-survivors of FDSV and child sexual abuse to navigate
the health system and to support the implementation of the National Plan.
This funding will extend and expand the existing six Family and Domestic Violence PHN pilots and
establish a pilot in each state and territory to provide increased support to primary care providers to
assist in the early identification and intervention of FDSV and child sexual abuse, and provide
coordinated referrals to support services. The funding will also go towards developing national
resources for primary health care staff to support people who have experienced sexual violence and
includes funding for a national evaluation of the extended and expanded pilot models. This evaluation
will inform Government consideration of any preferred pilot models of care.
This $48.7 million of grant funding formed part of a broader package of initiatives for Strengthening
health system response and trauma informed recovery care for survivors of family domestic and sexual
violence to a total value of $135.9 million from 2022-23 to 2025-26. The other components of this
package include:
• $67.2 million over four years from 2022-23 to pilot a new model of trauma-informed recovery
care embedded in existing services for people who have experienced FDSV. The pilot program
will be delivered through six PHNs across Australia to improve coordination and access to
services.
• $25.0 million over five years from 2022-23 to support the Illawarra Women’s Health Centre
(the Centre) to establish a Women’s Trauma Recovery Centre. The Centre is designed to be an
integrated, specialised, and dedicated service, offering individualised multidisciplinary and
multisectoral wrap-around support to women impacted by FDSV. The Centre will aim to
improve long-term health and psychosocial outcomes for women and families.
Recommendation 63
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government provide additional funding to No to
Violence to support the national operation of the Men’s Referral Service for a further three years.
Supported
The National Plan recognises the need to hold perpetrators to account through effective interventions
that stop their violence to keep women and children safe.
In the October 2022-2023 Budget the Government committed $10.8 million over four years to support
No to Violence to deliver:
• a Men’s Referral Service offering confidential telephone counselling and referrals for
perpetrators of domestic violence to help change their behaviour
• the Brief Intervention Service which provides multi-session telephone counselling to men
seeking support to change their violent or controlling behaviour.
Recommendation 64
The Committee recommends that the Department of Social Services review the adequacy of referral
services for perpetrators of family, domestic and sexual violence. The review should give consideration
to the need for greater consistency across jurisdictions and the establishment of a single nationally
83
coordinated intake point for perpetrators seeking behavioural change.
Noted
Recognising that perpetrators of FDSV may access services via a number of pathways, DSS currently
funds two national services as key referral points for men requiring support to change their behaviour:
• No to Violence Men’s Referral Service which provides national direct telephone and online
support and referrals for men who are using violent and controlling behaviour.
• MensLine Australia which provides a national telephone and online support, information and
referral service for men with family and relationship concerns.
Any national models for referrals will require consultation with state and territory governments. A ‘no
wrong door’ approach needs to be taken to ensure perpetrators can access services regardless of which
pathway they take.
Recommendation 65
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and territory governments provide
additional dedicated funding for perpetrator behaviour change programs.
This should include funding to trial new perpetrator intervention models, and specialised perpetrator
behaviour change programs for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, people from culturally and
linguistically diverse backgrounds, people with mental illness, people with disability, adolescents, people
of diverse sexuality and gender, and women.
Funded programs should be integrated with specialist family and domestic violence and other services,
and should include an evaluation component consistent with the proposed national outcomes framework,
which will contribute to building the evidence base on perpetrator interventions.
This funding should not be delivered through reductions in funding to services for victim-survivors.
Supported
The Government will consult with state and territory governments on implementation of this
recommendation.
In the October 2022-23 Budget the Government committed significant funding to educate men who use
violence to be aware of and change their behaviour, including:
• $10.8 million over four years to enable No to Violence to continue national coverage for the
Men’s Referral Service, a direct telephone and online support for men who use violent and
controlling behaviour, and the Brief Intervention Service, telephone-based counselling for men
who use violence. There is also funding for a combined independent evaluation of the Men’s
Referral Service, the Brief Intervention Service and MensLine’s Changing for Good programs
to be undertaken during 2022-23 and 2023-24. It is anticipated that this evaluation will
contribute to building the evidence base on perpetrator interventions.
• $25 million over five years will be provided to the states and territories through a National
Partnership Agreement, to apply innovative approaches to address FDSV perpetrator
behaviour. These approaches, which may include technological solutions such as electronic
84
monitoring, will help hold offenders to account, prevent them from reoffending, and improve
victim protection.
• $35 million over five years for a national early intervention trial for young men and adolescent
boys aged 12-18 who present with adverse childhood experiences including FDSV, and are at
risk of perpetrating sexual harm or violence.
• $27.8 million over two years to extend Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander family safety
services, and provide funding for up to 18 existing providers funded under the former National
Plan. The commitment includes an evaluation of program activities.
The 2022-23 Budget further delivered a historic First Nations Justice package worth a record
$99 million, aimed at Closing the Gap and improving the lives of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples. It will be jointly delivered by AGD and National Indigenous Australians Agency (NIAA).
A flagship measure under the First Nations Justice package is a $81.5 million justice reinvestment
commitment to reduce the disproportionate rates of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander adults and
young people represented in the criminal justice system and to address the underlying drivers to
incarceration and recidivism. This is an ongoing Budget commitment comprised of two primary
elements:
• $69.0 million over four years from 2022-26 ($20 million ongoing from 2026-27) for place-
based community-led justice reinvestment grant initiatives
• $12.5 million over four years from 2022-26 ($3.1 million ongoing from 2026-27) to establish
an independent National Justice Reinvestment Unit to coordinate initiatives at a national level.
Funded activities will be community-led, but may include support for specialised behaviour change
programs that are integrated with specialist family and domestic violence services, and services for
victim-survivors.
Recommendation 66
To support an increase in the number or perpetrators attending and completing behaviour change
programs, the Committee recommends that:
• the Australian Government and state and territory governments establish a centralised online
register of perpetrator intervention programs; and
• state and territory governments provide funding for perpetrator court support workers to enable
offenders to be referred to appropriate behaviour change programs and other support services.
Supported in principle
The Government will consult with state and territory governments on implementation of this
recommendation.
The Government provides funding to the FASS program for dedicated men’s support workers who
engage with male victims and alleged perpetrators of family and domestic violence who have matters
before the family law courts. These interventions include referrals to men’s behavioural change
programs and other support services.
While a centralised register of services is not currently in place, DSS currently funds two national
85
services as key referral points for men requiring support to change their behaviour:
• No to Violence Men’s Referral Service which provides national direct telephone and online
support and referrals for men who are using violent and controlling behaviour.
• MensLine Australia which provides a national telephone and online support, information and
referral service for men with family and relationship concerns.
Recommendation 67
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan include measures to support increased use of
technology in delivering perpetrator behaviour change programs, where it is safe to do so. These measures
should aim to support programs including but not limited to:
• programs for specific cohorts in sparsely populated regional, rural and remote areas who would
not otherwise have access to specialised programs; and
• alternatives to group-based programs for perpetrators for whom such programs are not
appropriate.
Supported
The National Plan recognises the need to focus on perpetrator interventions to stop violence from
escalating and ensure the safety of women and children. This includes supporting the use of technology
in delivering perpetrator behaviour change programs to support specific cohorts with limited access to
specialised programs in sparsely populated regional, rural and remote areas who would not otherwise
have access to specialised programs, and alternatives to group-based programs for perpetrators.
In the October 2022-23 Budget the Government committed to providing funding to measures that use
technology in delivering behaviour change and alternatives to group-based programs for perpetrators,
these include:
• $10.8 million over four years to enable No to Violence to continue national coverage for the
Men’s Referral Service, a direct telephone and online support for men who use violent and
controlling behaviour, and the Brief Intervention Service, telephone-based counselling for men
who use violence where a men’s behaviour change program is not available or appropriate.
• $25 million over five years provided to the states and territories through a National Partnership
Agreement, to apply innovative approaches to address FDSV perpetrator behaviour. These
approaches, which may include technological solutions such as electronic monitoring, will help
hold offenders to account, prevent them from reoffending, and improve victim protection.
States may choose to use the funding to trial measures to support alternatives to group-based
programs for perpetrators, and programs for specific cohorts in sparsely populated regional,
rural and remote areas with limited access to specialised programs.
• $35 million over five years for a national early intervention trial for young men and adolescent
boys aged 12-18 who present with adverse childhood experiences including FDSV, and are at
risk of perpetrating sexual harm or violence.
86
The National Plan outlines commitments in relation to building the evidence base on the effectiveness
of men’s behaviour change programs and other perpetrator interventions, as well as enhancing
perpetrator interventions and other services for men using violence in regional, remote and very remote
locations.
Recommendation 68
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and territory governments provide
dedicated funding to perpetrator behaviour change program providers and specialist family and domestic
violence services to deliver support services for partners, ex-partners, children, and other family members
of perpetrators enrolled in perpetrator behaviour change programs.
Supported in principle
The Government will consult with state and territory governments on implementation of this
recommendation.
The National Plan envisages a future with a comprehensive and coordinated crisis response system
including the operation of perpetrator interventions as part of an ecosystem of programs and in
partnership with women’s services.
Currently, the Government provides funding to the following programs which support perpetrators and
young men and adolescent boys at risk of perpetrating family and domestic violence to change their
behaviour:
• No to Violence’s Men’s Referral Service which is a national telephone and online support
service that provides counselling, information and referrals for men who are seeking assistance
to stop their violent behaviour.
• No to Violence’s Brief Intervention Service which provides multi-session telephone based
counselling for men who use violence, where a men’s behaviour change program is not
available (for example due to wait times) or appropriate.
• Specialised Family Violence Services (SFVS) – SFVS providers deliver a range of services
including specialised counselling for children, family capacity building and education sessions,
with some providers using some or all of their funding to deliver men’s behaviour change
programs.
• MensLine Australia’s Changing for Good which is a self-referral service that reinforces and
maintains behavioural and attitudinal change in men who have undertaken a men’s behavioural
change program in the last 12 months.
• MensLine Australia which provides a national telephone and online support, information and
referral service for men with family and relationship concerns.
• Innovative perpetrator responses over five years (2022-23 to 2026-27) to work in partnership
with states and territories to apply innovative approaches to address perpetrator behaviour.
• Early intervention trial over five years (2022-23 to 2026-27) for young men and adolescent
boys aged 12-18 who present with adverse childhood experiences including FDSV, and are at
risk of perpetrating sexual harm of violence.
87
The Government also funds services to support victim-survivors of FDSV such as 1800RESPECT,
Keeping Women Safe in their Homes (KWSITH) and SFVS. Additionally, DSS will undertake an
evaluation of SFVS, which will further inform its understanding of how SFVS services support the
partners, ex-partners, children, and other family members of perpetrators who access the services.
The Commonwealth supports states and territories through the FDSV National Partnership. States and
territories fund a range of frontline services to support victim-survivors, in addition to perpetrator
responses such as group-based men’s behaviour change programs, including those that are court-
mandated, and men’s telephone counselling and referral services.
The Government will also provide $169.4 million over four years from 2022-23 to work in conjunction
with states and territories to support 500 additional frontline service and community workers supporting
women and children experiencing FDSV.
Recommendation 69
The Committee recommends that the Department of Social Services lead the development of a national
outcomes framework for evidence-based perpetrator behaviour change programs.
Supported in principle
The former Council of Australian Governments (COAG) endorsed the National Outcome Standards for
Perpetrator Interventions (NOSPI) on 11 December 2015. The NOSPI measured the outcomes achieved
by perpetrator interventions across Australia. The standards were developed throughout 2015 and are
based on extensive consultation with government and non-government sector experts.
Work to collect and report data against the NOSPI concluded in 2021. This work found that substantial
data improvement is required before national outcomes related to perpetrator interventions can be
meaningfully measured.
Under the National Plan, the Outcomes Framework will provide a suite of indicators to measure
violence (including FDSV) over time. Some of these indicators may relate specifically to perpetrators,
and behaviour change programs.
Additional work will need to be undertaken to determine the best measures for behaviour change
programs. Perpetrator behaviour change programs are diverse, and data are not collected uniformly
across services or states and territories.
In 2022, ANROWS published an overview of reviews, which looks at the effectiveness of interventions
for perpetrators of family and domestic violence. This review forms the most consolidated evidence-
base for perpetrator interventions to date.
Recommendation 70
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, working with states and territories where
appropriate, provide funding for research on the backgrounds, characteristics, and recidivism rates of
perpetrators of family violence with a view to informing future policy and practice in relation to
perpetrator interventions. This should include research on adolescents, women, and children who
perpetrate violence against their parents, as well as men.
The Committee further recommends that the Australian Government consider the development of an
annual national, population level survey on the perpetration of family violence.
88
Partially supported
The National Plan outlines commitments in relation to building the evidence base on the effectiveness
of men’s behaviour change programs and other perpetrator interventions, as well as enhancing
perpetrator interventions and other services for men using violence in regional, remote and very remote
locations.
The Government acknowledges the important work of ANROWS in leading the national FDSV
research agenda and has committed additional funding of $23 million over five years in the 2022-23
Budget for ANROWS to continue its role in providing national leadership on data and evidence related
to violence against women and children. The ANROWS research program will include a focus on
perpetration.
In the absence of a feasibility study and costings analysis, and noting the research strategy being
undertaken by ANROWS, an annual, population level survey on perpetration may not provide
additional data over what can be collected through research projects or provide meaningful trend
analysis. Further work would need to be undertaken before determining whether a survey is the right
mechanism to better understanding perpetration in our community.
Recommendation 71
The Committee recommends that state and territory governments work with local community-based
organisations to design and implement place-based models of justice reinvestment, similar to that used
in the Maranguka Justice Reinvestment Project, as a matter of priority across Australia.
Noted
The Australian Government has an ambitious First Nations Justice agenda aimed at Closing the Gap
and improving the lives of Indigenous Australians. As part of the October 2022 Budget, the
Government committed $69 million in new funding over four years from 2022-23 (and $20 million
annually from 2026-27) for place-based community-led justice reinvestment projects, including early
investments in Alice Springs, Northern Territory and Halls Creek, Western Australia. Successful and
holistic implementation of the justice reinvestment commitment to turn the tide on incarceration of First
Nations peoples will require Commonwealth, state and territory governments to collaborate and partner
with First Nations peoples in both the design and operation of justice reinvestment initiatives.
AGD and NIAA, through a joint Taskforce, are stewarding the implementation of the Government’s
justice reinvestment commitment. The Taskforce is prioritising the Government’s early justice
reinvestment commitments in Alice Springs and Halls Creek which is anticipated to be delivered in
early 2023, as well as designing and developing the justice reinvestment grants program and
independent national justice reinvestment unit with First Nations people and relevant justice
reinvestment experts. Once the design of the program is completed, First Nations communities and
organisations will be invited to apply for justice reinvestment funding – anticipated at this stage from
mid-2023. In early 2023, the Government will also work in partnership with First Nations stakeholders
and justice reinvestment experts to provide readiness support to communities across Australia, ahead of
the national grants program opening.
89
Responses to assist victim-survivors
Recommendation 72
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and territory governments commit
to increasing the overall baseline funding for specialist family and domestic violence service providers.
Supported in principle
The Government will consult with state and territory governments on implementation of this
recommendation.
The Government funds 38 SFVS providers for a total of $50.3 million over five years from 2022-23 to
2026-27.
The 2021-22 Budget also committed funding of $260.0 million for the FDSV National Partnership with
state and territory governments to support frontline FDSV services and to trial new initiatives to
support women and children experiencing violence.
In the October 2022-23 Budget, the government committed an additional $10.7 million under the
FDSV National Partnership to bolster frontline FDSV services in the Northern Territory.
The Government has also committed to ongoing funding for 1800RESPECT, the national service that
provides counselling, information and support to people affected by FDSV.
Recommendation 73
The Committee recognises the importance of the provision and availability of supportive housing models
to assist victim-survivors of family, domestic and sexual violence to find safety for themselves and their
children. The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and territory
governments collaborate to identify programs that could be implemented across the country, and ensure
that specialist and ‘wrap-around’ support services have access to dedicated, long-term funding.
Supported in principle
The Government has committed to establishing a $10 billion Housing Australia Future Fund (the
Fund). Each year, a portion of the investment returns will be made available to fund acute housing
needs. In the first five years, the investment returns will fund:
• $100 million for crisis and transitional housing options for women and children experiencing
family and domestic violence and older women on low incomes who are at risk of
homelessness.
The Government will consult with state and territory governments on implementation of this
recommendation. Under the National Housing and Homelessness Agreement (NHHA), state and
territory governments are responsible for determining priorities and the type and locations of services
funded. States and territories also make decisions about social housing, including the building,
allocation, and refurbishment of dwellings.
The Government funds the Safe Places Emergency Accommodation (Safe Places) program, which is a
capital works grant program funding the renovation, building or purchase of dwellings to support
women and children experiencing family and domestic violence.
90
In September 2020, organisations across the country funded under the $60 million Safe Places program
were announced. A supplementary announcement as part of the 2021-22 Budget increased available
funding to the Safe Places program by $12.6 million. The safe places being delivered through the
program are becoming available progressively from mid-2021 to the end of 2024.
On 25 October, the Government committed $100 million over five years from 2022-23 to continue
funding under the Safe Places Program through the Safe Places Inclusion Round (Inclusion Round).
The Inclusion Round will deliver up to 720 new safe places for women and children across Australia.
Once completed, this will bring the total number of safe places to around 1,500 (including the first
tranche of projects). The Inclusion Round will focus on increasing the number of new and appropriate
emergency accommodation places for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women and children,
women and children from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds, and women and children
with disability, including those who experience the intersection of racism, ableism and sexism.
All Safe Places projects must satisfy the requirement to provide appropriate family and domestic
violence services alongside the emergency accommodation. The department will ensure adequate
engagement with states occurs prior to and through the implementation of the Inclusion Round to
ensure there are appropriate long-term funding options for specialist support services.
Recommendation 74
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and territory governments
collaborate in the provision of affordable housing solutions in Australia to meet long-term needs for those
made homeless by family, domestic and sexual violence, and to address the backlog of victim-survivors
who cannot access affordable housing
Supported in principle
The Government has established the Housing and Homelessness Ministerial Council with state and
territory Housing and Homelessness Ministers in order to provide a forum to progress critical housing
and homelessness reforms, including improving housing supply, affordability and accessibility, and
pathways out of homelessness.
The Government has committed to implementing a number of initiatives to help Australian households
more easily access safe and affordable housing. These initiatives include:
• The Regional First Home Buyer Guarantee brought forward by three months to commence on
1 October 2022 provides eligible first home buyers in regional areas to buy a home with a
deposit of as little as 5% without paying Lenders Mortgage Insurance.
• The expansion of the remit of the National Housing Infrastructure Facility to more flexibly
deploy up to $575 million to accelerate the supply of social and affordable housing.
• A Housing Accord, announced in the 2022-23 Budget, bringing states and territories, the
Australian Local Government Association, and representatives from the superannuation and
construction sectors together to unlock quality, affordable housing supply over the medium
term. Under the Accord, the Australian Government will provide $350 million over five years,
with ongoing availability payments over the longer term, to deliver an additional 10,000
affordable dwellings. States and territories will also support up to an additional 10,000
affordable homes, increasing the dwellings that can be delivered under the Accord up to
20,000.
91
• A Housing Australia Future Fund, which will build 30,000 new social and affordable housing
properties in its first five years. Over the first five years, investment returns will fund $100
million for crisis and transitional housing options and build around 4,000 social housing
properties allocated for women and children experiencing family and domestic violence and
older women on low incomes who are at risk of homelessness.
• The Help to Buy shared equity scheme provides eligible Australians to buy a home with a
smaller deposit and smaller mortgage.
• A National Housing Supply and Affordability Council to independently advise the Australian
Government on housing policy. It will be responsible for delivering advice on options to
improve housing supply and affordability, reporting on key issues in housing policy, and
promoting the regular collection and publication of data on housing supply, demand and
affordability.
• A National Housing and Homelessness Plan establish a clear national strategy to address the
significant challenges facing the housing and homelessness sector.
In 2022-23, the Australian Government expects to spend around $5.1 billion in Commonwealth Rent
Assistance to help eligible Australians on income support payments pay their rent and around
$1.6 billion through the NHHA to support state and territory governments to deliver housing and
homelessness services and programs.
Recommendation 75
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and territory governments:
• consider implementing policies to remove perpetrators rather than victim-survivors in cases of
family, domestic and sexual violence, where this can be achieved without threat to the safety of victim-
survivors; and
• consider funding for emergency accommodation for perpetrators to prevent victim-survivors
being forced to flee their homes or continue residing in a violent home.
Supported in principle
The Government acknowledges the importance of shifting the burden of ending violence away from
women and children and towards those who use violence. This includes removing perpetrators rather
than victim-survivors from the family home where feasible.
To achieve this, the Government funds the KWSITH program, which supports women and their
children to stay in their own home, or a home of their choice, where it is safe and appropriate to do so.
It provides a range of safety responses such as risk assessments and safety planning. It also provides
home security upgrades, such as locks, alarms, security screens, and technology security such as
monitored personal safety devices, surveillance cameras and electronic sweeping and debugging.
The Government will consult with state and territory governments on implementation of this
recommendation. Under the NHHA, state and territory governments are responsible for determining
priorities, and the type and locations of services funded. States and territories also make decisions about
social housing, including the building, allocation and refurbishment of dwellings.
Recommendation 76
92
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in conjunction with state and territory
governments, resource additional research regarding the intersection between mental health and family,
domestic and sexual violence. There should be a particular focus on the lived experiences of victim-
survivors and the children of victim-survivors who have experienced both family violence and mental
health issues.
Supported
There is an existing strong evidence base examining the intersection between mental health and FDSV.
This includes reports such as Violence against women and mental health (2020) which is a synthesis of
ANROWS’s research on the topic, as well as Domestic violence, risk factors and health (2018) based
on findings of the Australian Longitudinal Study on Women’s Health.
In March 2021, $10.0 million was announced for a new national research centre, called ALIVE, to help
lead a generational shift in mental health care. ALIVE brings together researchers, health professionals,
people with lived experience of mental ill-health and carers to deliver better models of mental health
care, and help create a more compassionate, person-centred mental health system.
Guided by lived experience, this evidence-based model will emphasise early identification and
prevention over crisis support, and take a holistic approach, addressing physical as well as mental
health.
Future research will identify opportunities for better coordination of services and more accessible and
successful care models that can be rolled out to reach more people across primary care and the
community.
Recommendation 77
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in partnership with the New South Wales
Government, fund a trial program of the Illawarra Women’s Health Centre’s Women’s Trauma Recovery
Centre. This funding could be part of a pilot program over a five-year period with a view, subject to
positive evaluation, to rolling out similar services around the country.
Supported
The Government recognises victim-survivors often need life-long support to recover and heal from
trauma. Through the October 2022-23 Budget, the Government announced $25.0 million over five
years to support the Illawarra Women’s Health Centre to establish a Women’s Trauma Recovery
Centre in the Illawarra region.
Guided by co-design with victim-survivors, the Women’s Trauma Recovery Centre will provide trauma-
informed services to women who have experienced FDSV. Services will:
• be integrated, specialised and dedicated to offering individualised, multidisciplinary and
multisectoral support, as needed over their lifetime
• address the impacts of FDSV, to improve long term health and psychosocial outcomes for
women and their families, including breaking the cycles of ongoing exposure to violence, and
intergenerational trauma; and.
• provide opportunities for research partnerships to lead recovery responses to FDSV, and be an
evidence-based model of care.
93
Services are expected to commence in the 2023-24 financial year.
Recommendation 78
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and territory governments provide
additional funding on a 50-50 basis to community legal centres for a minimum of five years to assist
victim-survivors of family, domestic and sexual violence. Such funding should be tied to appropriate
reporting mechanisms and performance indicators, including but not limited to the full disclosure of
funding provided to community legal centres by the states and territories.
Noted
The Government shares responsibility for funding the legal assistance sector, including community
legal centres, with the states and territories. The Government is supportive of complementary
investments that reflect this joint responsibility, although any arbitrary funding split may not recognise
the complexity associated with funding arrangements.
The Government is delivering more than $2.4 billion over five years through the NLAP to legal aid
commissions, community legal centres, and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Services. The
NLAP delivers baseline funding for these organisations, as well as specific funding for the specialist
DVUs, Health Justice Partnerships (HJPs), and FASS that some legal aid commissions and community
legal centres operate.
Under the NLAP, people experiencing, or at risk of, family violence are identified as a priority client
group for legal assistance services. The NLAP includes $129 million in funding over four years for the
delivery of dedicated legal assistance to women, including those experiencing, or at risk of, family
violence. Payment of NLAP funding is contingent on the provision of reporting against agreed outputs
and performance indicators.
The Government will continue to collaborate with the states and territories to understand and address
the funding needs of the legal assistance sector, in order to ensure that it is equipped to deal with
current and future challenges.
Recommendation 79
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and territory governments provide
funding on a 50-50 basis to legal aid commissions and community legal centres to engage more social
workers experienced in family violence, child protection and family law matters.
Noted
The Government shares responsibility for funding the legal assistance sector, including legal aid
commissions and community legal centres, with the states and territories. The Government is
supportive of complementary investments that reflect this joint responsibility, although any arbitrary
funding split may not recognise the complexity associated with funding arrangements.
Social workers with appropriate skills play an important complementary role in the delivery of legal
assistance services. Social workers can provide support in the areas of FDSV, child protection and
family law as they are able to assess and advise on risks, impacts of trauma and also identify
therapeutic responses and make referrals to assist clients where appropriate. They are skilled to support
engagement with children.
94
The Government is delivering more than $2.4 billion over five years through the NLAP to legal aid
commissions, community legal centres, and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Services. The
NLAP includes specific funding for the specialist DVUs, HJPs, and FASS delivered by some legal aid
commissions and community legal centres. DVUs and HJPs provide legal assistance and other forms of
support, including wrap-around services, to women experiencing or at risk of domestic violence. The
FASS program is funded to be provided in all family law court registry and circuit court locations
across Australia, to provide integrated frontline legal assistance services with social support services.
This recommendation could also be addressed by providing increased funding to specialist social
support services and ensuring strong referral pathways are in place between legal services and social
support services.
The Government will continue to collaborate with the states and territories to understand and address
the funding needs of the legal assistance sector, in order to ensure that it is equipped to deal with
current and future challenges. If this recommendation were to be implemented, Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Legal Services should be included as the clients of these service providers would also
benefit from increased access to social workers.
Recommendation 80
The Committee recommends that, subject to positive evaluation of the Legal Aid Commission Small
Claims Property Trials, the Australian Government along with states and territory governments fund on
a 50-50 basis the establishment of a small property mediation program.
Supported in principle
The Government is considering future funding of the Lawyer-assisted Family Law Property Mediation:
Legal Aid Commission Trial (LAC Trial) following an independent evaluation by AIFS.
The findings of the evaluation support the implementation of the LAC Trial on an ongoing basis, as an
efficient way of assisting parties with modest property pools to resolve post separation financial
matters. AIFS recommended some adjustments to the program to support effective implementation on a
long-term basis.
To date, funding of $17.5 million has been provided over four financial years, through to 30 June 2023,
for all legal aid commissions to trial legally-assisted property mediation. The program aims to improve
the economic security of women, by helping women with small value property disputes to achieve
equitable, affordable and timely property settlements.
The Joint Select Committee on Australia’s Family Law System second interim report recommended
ongoing funding and expansion of this program pending a positive evaluation.
Recommendation 81
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in collaboration with state and territory
governments, implement a national electronic database of domestic violence orders to support the
National Domestic Violence Order Scheme. The database should include provisional, interim, and final
domestic violence orders and should record breaches of orders.
In addition, the Australian Government should:
• work with state and territory governments to develop standardised training material to be
95
delivered to relevant staff alongside the introduction of the database; and
• consider whether the database should be accessible by specialist family and domestic violence
service providers in addition to courts and police.
Supported in principle
The NDVOS was agreed by the former COAG in December 2015 and commenced in November 2017.
NDVOS is a statutory scheme under which jurisdictions automatically recognise and enforce one
another’s domestic violence orders. It is currently underpinned by an interim information-sharing
solution that leverages the National Police Reference System to provide police and courts with
information on domestic violence orders issued across Australia. The NDVOS and the interim system
ensure police have greater situational awareness when responding to domestic violence incidents,
improving both victim and police safety, and ensure local courts can recognise, amend and otherwise
effectively deal with domestic violence orders, even if issued interstate.
The Government has committed to undertake a review of family and domestic violence order
frameworks. This would include considering the merits of, and options for, a comprehensive
information sharing system to underpin NDVOS, such as the National Criminal Intelligence System
(NCIS), currently being developed by the Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission to support
collation and sharing of criminal intelligence and information across state, territory and Commonwealth
law enforcement.
Subject to national agreement to use the NCIS or other platform for this purpose, the Government will
ensure that appropriate training is available to relevant state and territory agencies, and that
consideration is given to access needs for courts, police and other relevant stakeholders.
Recommendation 82
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in consultation with state and territory
governments, expand the National Domestic Violence Order Scheme to include orders issued under the
Family Law Act 1975 and orders issued under state and territory child protection legislation.
Noted
The Government will consider the scope of the NDVOS as part of its review of family and domestic
violence order frameworks, including whether any additional relevant orders should fall within the
Scheme.
The Government is also working with state and territory governments to improve information-sharing
between systems and jurisdictions, including work to finalise the National Strategic Framework for
Information Sharing between the Family Law and Family Violence and Child Protection systems
(National Framework). The National Framework will enhance and expand the flow of information
between the family law courts and relevant state and territory agencies, ensuring decision-makers have
access to the information needed to assess, manage and respond to risks of family violence and child
abuse. While the National Framework is still being finalised, the proposed scope would include family
law court orders as well as child protection information.
Recommendation 83
The Committee recommends that the Department of Social Services commission research on the potential
96
benefits and risks to victim-survivor safety of the establishment of a publicly accessible register of
convicted family, domestic and sexual violence offenders.
Supported in principle
The Government acknowledges the important work of ANROWS in leading the national FDSV
research agenda and has committed additional funding of $23 million over five years in the 2022-23
Budget for ANROWS to continue its role in providing national leadership on data and evidence related
to violence against women and children. Future research will include a focus on perpetration which
may include consideration of research into the benefits of such a register.
Recommendation 84
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with the states and territories to adopt
a variant of the United Kingdom’s ‘Silent Solution’ for silent calls for police assistance.
Noted
Policing responses to FDSV are the primary responsibility of state and territory governments. The
Government will work with state and territory governments to consider the merits of best practice
models for police assistance in a domestic context, including the United Kingdom’s silent calls for
police assistance.
Recommendation 85
The Committee recommends that the states and territories increase criminal penalties for breaches of
apprehended or domestic violence orders, and ensure that the judiciary receives further training about the
importance of security to victim-survivors of family, domestic and sexual violence and their families.
Noted
Criminal penalties for breaches of apprehended or domestic violence orders is the responsibility of state
and territory governments. The Government will work with state and territory governments through
appropriate national fora, such as SCAG, to consider the appropriateness of existing criminal penalties
for breaches of apprehended or domestic violence orders issued within their jurisdiction.
The Government, with the states and territories, co-funds the AIJA to develop and maintain the
National Domestic and Family Violence Bench Book (Bench Book). The Bench Book is an online
resource for judicial officers considering legal issues relevant to family and domestic violence related
matters. The Government also co-funds the NJCA to deliver the FVitC training program for judicial
officers, which builds upon the Bench Book. The Bench Book addresses topics such as fair hearing and
safety; trauma-informed judicial practice; protection orders; victim-survivor experience of court
processes; dynamics of domestic violence; coercive control; and economic and financial abuse. Future
updates to the Bench Book and FVitC training will consider current recommendations.
Recommendation 86
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and territory governments jointly
develop a mechanism to provide resources to victim-survivors to assist them to leave their home and
resettle to escape a violent relationship. This should include examining ways in which the
Commonwealth may recover the costs from the perpetrator.
97
Supported
In October 2021, the Government established a two-year trial of the EVP to provide financial assistance
to victim-survivors leaving a violent intimate partner relationship to establish a home free from
violence. The EVP provides victim-survivors with individualised financial assistance packages of up to
$5,000, including up to $1,500 in cash or cash equivalents and the remaining funds provided in goods,
services and supports. In the October 2022 Budget, the Government committed an additional $240
million to continue the EVP after the end of the trial, until 30 June 2026.
The Government is also establishing a two year Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander place-based trial
of the EVP in the Cairns region, to commence in early 2023. The place-based trial will be delivered by
an Indigenous-led organisation located in the Cairns region to provide specialised and culturally-
appropriate support for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander victim-survivors to establish a home free
from violence. The place-based trial intends to assess and respond to the particular needs and
experiences of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people experiencing intimate partner violence.
The Government provides support to reduce financial and other barriers temporary visa holders face
when experiencing violence through the national, two-year Temporary Visa Holders Experiencing
Violence Pilot (the Pilot). Under the Pilot, temporary visa holders experiencing family and domestic
violence are eligible for financial assistance of up to $3,000 and legal assistance to address their
migration, family law and family and domestic violence matters.
There are also a number of other Commonwealth Government-funded services and programs available
to victim-survivors to assist them to leave their home and resettle to escape a violent relationship,
including:
• No interest loans for women experiencing family and domestic violence provide safe,
affordable credit to help women with the financial costs of establishing a new household, such
as relocation expenses, rental bonds, rental payments and essential household items.
• Emergency relief, which can assist people to meet their immediate basic needs in terms of
financial distress or hardship.
• Financial Counselling, which can help people in personal financial difficulty to address their
financial problems, manage debts and make informed choices.
• The KWSITH initiative, which the Government funds through state and territory governments
and select non-government providers to deliver services to improve the safety of women and
their children who have experienced family and domestic violence. The KWSITH initiative
supports women and their children to stay in their own home, or a home of their choice, where
it is safe and appropriate to do so through a range of safety responses such as risk assessments,
safety planning, home security audits and upgrades, technology upgrades and case
management.
It is important to note that the delivery of support services in each jurisdiction is the responsibility of
state and territory governments.
Recommendation 87
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in conjunction with state and territory
governments, ensure that the next National Plan recognises that family, domestic and sexual violence
impacts upon workplaces.
98
Supported
The National Plan recognises the impacts of FDSV upon workplaces and places particular emphasis on
the role of business and industry to prevent and respond to violence against women and children. The
National Plan highlights the Champions of Change Coalition’s framework for workplace action on
family and domestic violence as one example of an evidence-based approach to underpin and guide
business and industry action.
The Government has committed to implementing all 55 recommendations of the Respect@Work report
and 28 recommendations of Set the Standard: Report on the Independent Review into Commonwealth
Parliamentary Workplaces (2021), as reiterated in the National Plan, to ensure all workplaces are safe
for women.
The Respect@Work report emphasises the shared responsibility of Commonwealth, state and territory
governments, and the private sector, including business and industry, in implementing the
recommendations of the report.
In recognition of the impact of family and domestic violence on employees and workplaces, the
Government delivered on its commitment to legislate 10 days paid family and domestic violence leave
per year as a universal workplace right under the National Employment Standards for all employees,
including casuals. This will ensure no woman is forced to choose between their safety and their
economic security. Paid family and domestic violence leave under the National Employment Standards
commenced from 1 February 2023 for many employees and commences on 1 August 2023 for
employees of small businesses with fewer than 15 employees.
Recommendation 88
The Committee recommends that the next National Plan include greater emphasis and specific detail on
the crucial role of work and economic equality in the advancement of gender equality and the prevention
of family, domestic and sexual violence.
Supported
The National Plan recognises that economic inequality persists in society, manifesting through the
gender pay gap and superannuation gap for example. This impacts on gender equality, a key cross-
cutting focus throughout the National Plan. Advancing gender equality is vital to preventing violence
against women and children, and is recognised as a key objective under the Prevention domain of the
National Plan.
The National Plan promotes women’s economic equality by emphasising the need to remove barriers,
including access to affordable childcare and housing, and ensure women’s equal participation in the
workforce.
The Government has also committed to the development of a National Strategy to Achieve Gender
Equality that articulates the structural reforms required to achieve gender equality in Australia. The
National Strategy will complement the National Plan and include a focus on women’s economic
security and independence.
99
Notes
1 H Boxall and A Morgan, ‘Who is most at risk of physical and sexual partner violence and coercive control
during the COVID-19 pandemic?’, Trends & Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice, 618, Australian Institute of
Criminology, 2021, doi:10.52922/ ti78047
2 B Harris and D Woodlock, ‘‘For my safety’ Experiences of technology-facilitated abuse among women with
intellectual disability or cognitive disability’, eSafety Commissioner, 2021,
https://www.esafety.gov.au/research/technology-facilitated-abuse-women-intellectual-or-cognitive-disability. The
report revealed that the tactics used for technology-facilitated abuse of women with intellectual or cognitive
disability are like those faced by all women, but there are some unique differences.
3 C Brown, M Yap, A Thomassin et al, ‘Can I just share my story? Experiences of technology-facilitated abuse
among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women from regional and remote areas’, eSafety Commissioner,
2021, https://www.esafety.gov.au/research/technology-facilitated-abuse-among-aboriginal-and-torres-strait-
islander-women. The report revealed that abuse facilitated through technology has a serious and long-lasting
impact on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women.
4 M Dragiewicz, P O’Leary, J Ackerman et al, ‘Children and technology-facilitated abuse in domestic and family
violence situations’, eSafety Commissioner’, 2020, https://www.esafety.gov.au/research/children-and-technology-
facilitated-abuse-domestic-and-family-violence-situations. The report revealed the impacts of technology-
facilitated abuse on children and highlights the range of strategies used for protection and intervention. Among
the findings the research found that technology-facilitated abuse of children featured in 27% of domestic violence
cases.
5 A Powell, A Flynn and S Hindes, ‘Technology-facilitated abuse: National survey of Australian adults’
experiences’, ANROWS, 2022, https://www.anrows.org.au/publication/technology-facilitated-abuse-national-
survey-of-australian-adults-experiences/.
6 C Teunissen, H Boxall, S Napier et al, ‘The sexual exploitation of Australian children on dating apps and
websites’, Trends & issues in crime and criminal justice, 658, Australian Institute of Criminology, 2022,
doi.org/10.52922/ti78757.
7 Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Personal Safety Survey (PSS)’, ABS, 2017.
8 D Woodlock, K Bentley, D Schulze et al, ‘Second National Survey of Technology Abuse and Domestic
Violence in Australia’, WESNET, 2020, https://wesnet.org.au/about/research/2ndnatsurvey/.
9 J Ogilvie, L Thomsen, J Barton et al. ‘Adverse childhood experiences among youth who offend: Examining
exposure to domestic and family violence for male youth who perpetrate sexual harm and violence’, ANROWS,
2022, https://www.anrows.org.au/project/adverse-childhood-experiences-and-the-intergenerational-transmission-
of-domestic-and-family-violence-in-young-people-who-engage-in-harmful-sexual-behaviour-and-violence-
against-women/.
100
