Australian Government response to the Senate Finance and
Public Administration Legislation Committee Report

Workplace Gender Equality Amendment (Setting Gender
Equality Targets) Bill 2024

September 2025

Introduction

On 21 November 2024, the Senate referred an inquiry into the Workplace Gender Equality
Amendment (Setting Gender Equality Targets) Bill 2024 to the Senate Finance and Public
Administration References Committee (the Committee).

The Committee received 31 submissions and a Committee hearing was held on 22 January 2025.

On 30 January 2025, the Committee tabled its report titled Workplace Gender Equality
Amendment (Setting Gender Equality Targets) Bill 2024.

The Government's formal response to the report and recommendation follow below. As part of
preparing this response, the Government consulted the Workplace Gender Equality Agency as
the agency responsible for administering the legislative framework which the Bill amends.

The Government supports the recommendations made by the Committee and notes the
recommendation that the Bill be passed. The Government response also addresses the
Coalition’s dissenting recommendation.

Government Response to Committee Recommendations

No. Recommendation Government Response
The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
1. | The committee recommends the Australian
Government provide full guidelines on what | The Workplace Gender Equality Agency's (WGEA) Compliance Strategy, updated in July 2025,

the Workplace Gender Equality Agency assists relevant employers to understand their obligations and responsibilities under the
would accept as a ‘reasonable excuse’ for Workplace Gender Equality Act 2012 (WGE Act). It also details how WGEA identifies relevant
non-compliance. employers that are non-compliant and responds to such non-compliance. The Strategy

outlines several examples that WGEA would likely not consider as a reasonable excuse for
non-compliance. WGEA relies on the same meaning of the term as in other legislation and at
common law, with the test being, ‘what an ordinary member of the community would accept
as is reasonable in the circumstances,’

The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
2.| The committee recommends the
Workplace Gender Equality Agency closely | The gender equality targets scheme has been designed in consultation with a range of

consult unions on the development of stakeholders. The Australian Government supports WGEA’s continued consultation with
guidance materials for reporting entities on | relevant stakeholders, including unions, as part of the development of guidance materials for
target selection and compliance. employers on target selection and compliance, where possible.

The Australian Government agrees in principle to this recommendation.
3.| The committee recommends the Australian

Government consider that, should the Bill The Australian Government supports WGEA’s existing efforts to encourage consultation
pass, the Workplace Gender Equality between employers and their employees on issues concerning workplace gender equality.
Agency should include in its reporting The proposed target for Gender Equality Indicator (GEI) 5 focuses on improving employee
framework for gender equality reporting, consultation. GEI 5 measures when, how and how often employers engage with their
questions on consultation undertaken with | employees on issues of workplace gender equality, employers who will be subject to the
employees and workplace delegates. targets scheme are already required to have a policy or strategy on employee consultation.

The Australian Government will consider options to collect employer data on consultations
undertaken between employers, their employees and workplace delegates on target
selection and other measures to improve gender equality in the workplace. This would involve
updating the employer questionnaire and the legislative framework. Any proposed
amendments to the employer questionnaire would involve stakeholder consultation and be

carefully considered for data value and utility, the established link with workplace gender


equality outcomes, the reporting burden on employers, as well as privacy and legal
considerations.

The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.

4.| The committee recommends the Australian

Government consider applying Workplace In 2025, through its Building Australia’s Future: Labor's Commitment to Women, the
Gender Equality Agency compliance Government committed to strengthening compliance with procurement rules which make
requirements for procurement eligibility for | sure the Government is only working with companies that meet WGEA requirements. The
government grants. Australian Government is undertaking a review of the Workplace Gender Equality

Procurement Principles and will consider this recommendation as part of the review. This
work also implements Recommendation 8 of the 2021 Review of the WGE Act.

5.| The committee recommend that the bill be | The Government notes the recommendation that the Bill be passed.
assed.

Government Response to Dissenting Recommendation

No. | Recommendation Government Response

The Government notes this recommendation.
Coalition Recommend the Bill not be
passed,

