Australian Government response to the
Joint Committee of Public Accounts and Audit report:
Report 505: Inquiry into Policy and Program Design and
Implementation
SEPTEMBER 2025
Recommendations
The Government thanks the Joint Committee of Public Accounts and Audit for its work in
preparing the report and for its detailed consideration of the issues raised. The Government
acknowledges the Committee’s findings and appreciates the contributions made by
stakeholders throughout the inquiry process. This Government response addresses the two
policy recommendations outlined in the Committees report, specifically Recommendation 5
and Recommendation 8. The remaining recommendations, which are administrative in
nature, will be considered and responded to by the relevant departments.
Recommendation 5: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government
prioritise any necessary legislative changes in order to address the current structure of
the Health Insurance Act 1973 to align with the modern technological requirements of
telehealth.
Response: The Australian Government agrees in principle to this recommendation.
The Australian Government is advancing several updates to the Health Insurance Act 1973
(Act) and subordinate regulations in its stewardship of the Medicare Benefits Schedule
(MBS). For example, the Health Insurance Legislation Amendment (Assignment of Medicare
Benefits) Act 2024, assented to on 9 July 2024, will modernise the process of bulk billing
across the range of MBS services, informed by findings of the Australian National Audit
Office in its 2023 report Expansion of Telehealth Services. Relevant amendments to
regulations are a current priority of the Government, to support changes to assignment of
Medicare benefits which will take effect from January 2026.
The structure of the Act and subordinate regulations are considered to promote MBS
telehealth care of a high standard, enabling patients to access safe and equitable services. The
Government continues to consider changes to MBS telehealth items that have been
recommended by the independent clinician-led MBS Review Advisory Committee (MRAC),
ensuring that the MBS supports healthcare providers to adopt contemporary evidence-based
practice. Several MRAC recommendations have already been implemented via amendments
to the Health Insurance (Section 3C General Medical Services – Telehealth and Telephone
Attendances) Determination 2021.
While MBS regulations specify whether MBS services should be provided in-person, by
phone or by videoconference, they do not provide detailed technology specifications.
Healthcare providers are private businesses and are responsible for their choice of technology
solutions which must be compliant with relevant national, state or territory privacy and
security laws.
Recommendation 8: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government
consider further reforms to make the partner and child family visa programs truly
demand driven with reasonable waiting times, excising these streams from the annual
headline permanent migration cap and allocating sufficient processing resources
annually to meet projected demand with a reasonable average processing time.
Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The permanent Migration Program (Migration Program) planning level is set based on
Government priorities. The Government considers a range of factors when determining the
size and composition of the Migration Program. These factors include Australia’s strategic,
economic and social priorities, community needs, demand for visas and impacts of planning
levels on visa processing times.
The Child and Partner programs are managed under the Family Stream of the Migration
Program. Both the Child and Partner programs are demand driven. The planning levels for
these programs are nominal and are not subject to a legislative cap.
All visa programs, regardless of whether there is a planning level in place, are subject to
limited resourcing which can result in delays in application assessment, especially in periods
of increased demand. Processing times are published on the Department of Home Affairs’
website.
