Australian Government response to the
Senate Economics Legislation Committee report:
Annual Reports No. 2 of 2010
March 2023
Response to the Committee’s Recommendation
Recommendation 1
1.35 The committee recommends that the government, in consultation with the Joint
Committee of Public Accounts and Audit, amend the annual reporting requirements for
government entities to provide for more systematic reporting in relation to external
scrutiny, including for parliamentary committee inquiries and reports, in line with
sections B.2 and B.3 of the ACT Chief Minister's 2007-2010 Annual Report
Directions.
The Australian Government supports and has implemented this recommendation.
The recommendation has been implemented through the introduction of the Public
Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 (PGPA Act) and the Public
Governance, Performance and Accountability Rule 2014 (PGPA Rule), which saw the
inclusion of all annual report requirements captured within the same legislation.
The PGPA Act (sections 46 and 97) introduced enhanced requirements for external scrutiny
of entity activities. These sections, along with the PGPA Rule, provide an integrated and
consistent set of annual report requirements for all Commonwealth entities.
• Section 17AG of the PGPA Rule goes to the external scrutiny of annual reports
for non-corporate Commonwealth entities.
• Sections 17BE(r) and 28E(n) deal with scrutiny requirements for corporate
Commonwealth entities and Commonwealth companies.
The PGPA Act sets out obligations relating to the planning for resource use and mandates the
reporting on how effectively those resources have been applied. The Act standardises the
reporting deadline.
The Joint Committee of Public Accounts and Audit (the Committee) has an active general
oversight role regarding the PGPA Act and Rule and has played an ongoing role since its
inception. The Committee reviews the rules under the PGPA Act where matters are
significant and has a specific role in approving any changes to the annual report rule for
Commonwealth entities under Section 46 of the Act.
