Senator the Hon Malarndirri McCarthy
Minister for Indigenous Australians
Senator for Northern Territory and Christmas and Cocos (Keeling) Islands

Senator the Hon Sue Lines
President of the Senate
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

Dear President

| present to you the Australian Government’s response to Senate Order for the Production of
Documents No. 178: Rural and Regional Affairs Transport References Committee - Government
Response - Impact and mitigation of aircraft noise.

The Order requested that the outstanding government response to the report of the Rural and
Regional Affairs and Transport References Committee, Impact and mitigation of aircraft noise be

tabled on 3 November 2025.

Please find enclosed a letter from the Hon Catherine King MP, Minister for Infrastructure,
Transport, Regional Development and Local Government and a document, in response to

the Order.

Yamalu

Senator the Hon Malarndirri McCarthy
Minister for Indigenous Australians

“S /\\ /2025

Enc: — letter from the Minister for Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development
and Local Government responding to Order for the Production of Documents No. 178
— Government response document

cc: Minister Catherine King

Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600

Ries aa
The Hon Catherine King MP

Minister for Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development and Local Government
Member for Ballarat

Ref: MS25-002829

Senator the Hon Malarndirri McCarthy
Minister for Indigenous Australians

Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

_ Wratandurr '
Dear Minister

I write in relation to the Order for the Production of Documents No. 178, moved by Senator
Askew on behalf of Senator McKenzie and agreed by the Senate on 27 October 2025.

The order requested that the outstanding government response to the report of the Rural and
Regional Affairs and Transport References Committee’s inquiry into the impact and

mitigation of aircraft noise be tabled no later than 10am on 3 November 2025.

This response has now been tabled.

I would appreciate your assistance in conveying this information to the President of the
Senate.

Yours sincerely

Catherine King MP
3/4/2025

Enc: Government response document

PO Box 6022 Parliament House, Canberra ACT 2600 | Tel: (02) 6277 7520
OFFICIAL
