Australian Government response to the House of
Representatives Standing Committee on
Communications and the Arts report:
Am I Ever Gonna See You Live Again?
Yes way! You bet! Oh yeah!
November 2025
Contents
Overview ........................................................................................................................... 3
Australian Government Response ........................................................................................ 5
Recommendation 1: ....................................................................................................................... 5
Recommendation 2: ....................................................................................................................... 6
Recommendation 3: ....................................................................................................................... 7
Recommendation 4: ....................................................................................................................... 8
Recommendation 5: ....................................................................................................................... 9
Recommendation 6: ..................................................................................................................... 10
Recommendation 7: ..................................................................................................................... 11
Recommendation 8: ..................................................................................................................... 12
Recommendation 9: ..................................................................................................................... 13
Recommendation 10: ................................................................................................................... 14
Recommendation 11: ................................................................................................................... 15
Recommendation 12: ................................................................................................................... 16
Recommendation 13: ................................................................................................................... 17
Recommendation 14: ................................................................................................................... 18
Recommendation 15: ................................................................................................................... 19
Recommendation 16: ................................................................................................................... 20
Recommendation 17: ................................................................................................................... 22
Recommendation 18: ................................................................................................................... 23
Recommendation 19: ................................................................................................................... 24
Recommendation 20: ................................................................................................................... 26
Overview
The Australian Government welcomes the report by the former House of Representatives Standing
Committee on Communications and the Arts (the Committee) following its inquiry into the
challenges and opportunities within the Australian live music industry.
The Government recognises the important contribution the music industry makes to Australian
culture and is committed to improving arts and cultural outcomes for Australia. Despite its cultural
and economic importance, the Australian live music industry continues to face challenges.
In 2023, the Government launched the National Cultural Policy, Revive: a place for every story, a
story for every place. Revive is the Government’s flagship commitment for renewing and reviving the
arts and cultural sector. Under Revive, the Government recognises that artistic and cultural work is a
professional activity and that fair pay and conditions for arts and cultural workers are essential.
Revive commits to support stronger cultural infrastructure, expand income opportunities for artists,
increase opportunities for more diverse programming, increase audiences for Australian original live
music, and increase equity in access to arts and culture. As a first step, the Government mandated
minimum remuneration for professional musicians and performers at Australian Government events
and functions.
To strengthen the Government’s commitment to the music sector, Music Australia was established
within Creative Australia, the Australian Government’s principal arts investment and advisory body,
under the Creative Australia Act 2023. As a dedicated body within Creative Australia, Music Australia
and its Council invests in and supports the Australian contemporary music industry, building
partnerships and expertise that both directly support Australian artists and benefit Australian
audiences. An initial total of $69.4 million in funding over four years has been invested in Music
Australia. The investment increases year on year, indexed at $28.2m ongoing from 2027-28.
In June 2025 Music Australia published the first comprehensive analysis of the economic
contribution of the Australian music industry, The Bass Line: Charting the economic contribution of
Australia’s music industry. It also released the much-anticipated Listening In trilogy, a series of three
research reports on Australians’ engagement with music, providing valuable information to support
the industry and inform policy development.
The Government continues to provide critical support to live music venues and festivals that
showcase Australian artists through its commitment to expand and extend the Revive Live program
into 2026-27, bringing the Government’s total investment for Revive Live to $25 million over two
years. Revive Live was first announced as part of the Critical Support for the Live Music and Festivals
measure in the 2024–25 Budget and provided $7.8 million in funding to support 63 music festival-
based activities and 49 live music venues under the first round.
This includes funding towards activities that improve accessibility and inclusion at live music events,
providing increased participation opportunities for audiences, and career pathways for musicians
and music workers with disability.
As a five-year policy, Revive, is due to end in 2027, and the Government will soon turn its attention
to the next iteration of its National Cultural Policy and commence consultations.
3
As noted by the Committee, several of the recommendations fall under the jurisdiction of the state
and territory governments – the Government values ongoing and productive engagement with state
and territory governments, and will continue to work closely with all jurisdictions and industry
partners in an effort to deliver effective policy and programs that support the Australian music
industry.
The Government commends the Committee for its thorough engagement with all levels of
government, artists, broadcasters, promoters, venues, festivals, service providers and peak industry
bodies throughout the inquiry. The Government has considered the matters raised as a result of the
inquiry and the recommendations of the Committee.
4
Australian Government Response
The Australian Government’s response to Am I Ever Gonna See You Live Again? is set out in detail
below.
Recommendation 1:
4.22 The Committee recommends the Australian Government investigate the potential benefits of
a tax offset for the live music industry. The Treasury, the Office of the Arts and Creative
Australia should be tasked with developing a policy proposal for the Australian Government to
consider.
4.23 Such a tax offset might be considered in conjunction with proposals for a live performance
offset that would benefit other artforms such as theatre.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The arts and creative sectors have been actively advocating for tax offsets for live performance,
including the live music industry.
The next iteration of the National Cultural Policy is due for development prior to 2028.
5
Recommendation 2:
4.24 The Committee recommends Australian consumer law be amended to better regulate the
selling of tickets to live music, by:
 improving the transparency of fees and charges within the price of tickets
 limiting extreme variability in ticket prices caused by ‘dynamic pricing’
The Government notes this recommendation.
In November 2024, the Government released a supplementary consultation paper on a proposal to
protect consumers from unfair trading practices. This paper proposed the introduction of a general
principles-based prohibition and specific prohibitions to address a number of unfair practices that
may fall into potential gaps or grey areas in the Australian Consumer Law (ACL).
In particular, the consultation considered potential reform options and the adequacy of existing ACL
provisions to address:
• drip pricing practices, where fees are added through the stages of a purchase; and
• dynamic pricing, where a business increases the price of the product during the purchasing
process in response to factors such as demand.
In November 2025, following agreement by States and Territories, the government announced it will
legislate a general prohibition on practices that manipulate consumer decision making and cause
harm, and strengthen protections against hidden fees.
In March 2025, the Government also announced it will consult on extending unfair trading practice
protections to small businesses.
6
Recommendation 3:
4.25 The Committee recommends the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission monitor
the Australian music industry for anti-competitive conduct and take enforcement action as
required.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) is responsible for enforcing
Australia's competition law across the economy, including the music industry. The ACCC exercises its
enforcement powers independently and uses a range of tools to ensure compliance with the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010. If the ACCC finds evidence of anti-competitive behaviour, it
investigates the issue further and acts as appropriate.
7
Recommendation 4:
4.26 The Committee recommends the Australian Government add a small levy to the price of
tickets to large music events and direct the funds raised to support for small venues and
grassroots live music (see Recommendation 5).
The Government notes this recommendation.
Narrow-based levies are at odds with the principles of efficient tax system design. They often come
with high collection costs and a range of administrative complexities that would need to be
considered by the Government.
Work has already progressed, led by the Australian Live Music Business Council, to implement a
ticket levy through a voluntary model involving major promoters and ticketing companies.
The Government recognises grassroots live music venues and festivals are a critical part of the music
industry ecosystem. The Government has committed to expand the Revive Live program,
administered by the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development,
Communications, Sport and the Arts, providing a total of $25 million in funding over two years,
extending the program into 2026-27. This investment will provide critical support to majority
Australian-owned grassroots live music venues and festivals that showcase Australian artists.
8
Recommendation 5:
4.27 The Committee recommends an extension and expansion of the Revive Live program. This
expansion might be funded through a ticket levy (Recommendation 4) and funds could be
disbursed by Music Australia. The funding could be offered in three streams:
 Live and local: a series of performances at a live music venue or non-traditional venue with
mandated minimum performance fees.
 Live ready: funding for capital improvements to live music venues to improve the functionality
and accessibility of venues. This could include costs like sound-proofing, equipment upgrades,
disability access.
 Live for all: funding for music festivals with an emphasis on improving the accessibility,
viability and diversity of live music, including regional festivals, all-ages events, First Nations
festivals, community focussed events and not-for-profit based operations.
The Government partially supports this recommendation.
The Government recognises that the sector continues to face challenges that have resulted in live
music venues closing and live music festivals cancelling.
The Government, under the Revive Live program, provides critical support to established majority-
Australian owned live music venues and festivals that showcase Australian artists.
Revive Live has already provided $7.8 million in grant funding to support 112 live music businesses,
including 63 music festival-based activities and 49 live music venues.
Revive Live was first announced as part of the Critical Support for the Live Music and Festivals
measure in the 2024–25 Budget. The Government has committed to increase funding for Revive Live
to $25 million over two years extending the program into 2026-27.
Revive Live is supporting the long-term sustainability of presenting live Australian contemporary
music by providing financial relief to ensure artists are paid, limiting venue closures and event
cancellations, and allowing audiences to continue to participate in Australian live music into the
future.
Revive Live has a strong focus on activities that improve accessibility and provide participation
opportunities for audiences, and career pathways for musicians and music workers, with disability.
Revive Live will safeguard performance opportunities for Australian artists with funding to create a
more resilient and sustainable live music ecosystem, in the face of rising operational costs for live
music venues and festivals. This recognises live music venues and music festivals as a fundamental
pillar for success that is essential to the development of both artist and audience—allowing artists to
grow audiences, build professionalism and profile, and earn an income.
The establishment of Music Australia, will increase support for the contemporary music industry
through specific actions outlined in Revive. This support is targeted to artists and strategic industry
partnerships, and is specifically designed to reach into the commercial sectors, where traditional
grants funding models have had limited success.
9
Recommendation 6:
4.28 The Committee recommends state, territory and local governments consider designating
‘special entertainment precincts’ in recognition of the economic and cultural value of these
places.
4.29 Special Entertainment Precincts should benefit from a regulatory regime more supportive to
their ongoing viability. This may include exemptions to trading hour restrictions, concessional
liquor excise rates and differentiated noise complaint processes.
4.30 Further, the Committee recommends the Australian Government gather information on best
practice in this area, provide advice to jurisdictions on how to establish and support special
entertainment precincts, and monitor the effectiveness of reforms across the jurisdictions
that implement them.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government recognises that urban areas play a crucial role in fostering inclusive and
vibrant communities by supporting a spectrum of creative talent, community participation, and
cultural organisations. Supporting arts and cultural sectors contributes to more vibrant, inclusive
urban environments and enhances the cultural richness of cities through art, creative expression,
and community collaboration. Tourism, heritage and sport contribute to wellbeing and liveability of
urban areas.
The Australian Government is providing support to entertainment precincts through a partnership
with the Tasmanian Government. In June 2025, the Department of Infrastructure, Transport,
Regional Development, Communications, Sport and the Arts entered into an agreement to jointly
fund a feasibility study to investigate designated precincts for live music in Hobart and Launceston
and explore ways to reduce red tape, allowing live music to thrive.
The Government considers point 4.28 regarding the designation of special entertainment precincts is
a matter for state, territory and local governments. State, territory and local governments hold the
regulatory and land-use mechanisms to establish special entertainment precincts (unless the
precincts were to occur on Commonwealth land), and some jurisdictions are undertaking work in
relation to entertainment precincts.
For example, the Australian Capital Territory is establishing the City Centre Entertainment Precinct
(CCEP) and introducing fit for purpose Noise Standards for entertainment noise. This will support live
music and entertainment businesses, bars, restaurants and other non-licensed entertainment
venues in the CCEP and provide a wider range of entertainment offerings, attracting more visitors
and boosting the live music ecosystem and the city's cultural vibrancy.
Additionally, on 10 September 2024, the Parliament of South Australia passed the Planning,
Development and Infrastructure (Designated Live Music Venues and Protection of Crown and Anchor
Hotel) Amendment Act 2024. This legislation specifies that a condition will be imposed that must
include “noise attenuation measures” when approving new residential developments within 60
metres of a boundary of a live music venue in the central business district.
The intention of these measures is to provide ongoing protection for designated live music venues in
the City of Adelaide against noise complaints from future residents.
Regulation for Special Entertainment Precincts is a matter of state, territory and local government.
10
Recommendation 7:
4.31 The Committee recommends the Australian Government assess the viability of a rebate or
voucher scheme to incentivise younger audiences to attend live music.
4.32 This may include offering event presenters a rebate to compensate them for income foregone
by offering discounted tickets to young audiences and ‘two for one’ tickets for audience
members required to attend with an adult or support person/carer.
4.33 An alternative approach may be to offer vouchers directly to prospective audience members.
4.34 The scheme should prioritise:
 young audiences, from under 18s to early 30s – the demographic in most significant decline
amongst live music audiences
 events, venues or festivals with Australian artists and original music in their programs
4.35 The Committee recommends the Australian Government partner with state and territory
jurisdictions in funding a trial of any future rebate or voucher scheme.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The arts and cultural sectors have been advocating for a culture pass or voucher system to
incentivise young people to attend live music and stimulate the industry through increased
attendance. Evidence shows that the pandemic impacted audience confidence in attending live
events and ticket-buying behaviour, in particular by young people.
As each state and territory may address the topic of a rebate or voucher scheme differently based
on the specific needs of their own jurisdictions and budget priorities, the Government considers this
recommendation is a matter for state and territory governments.
Revive committed to embedding the voices of young Australians in policy and programs across
Government. Australia’s first Creative Industries Youth Advisory Group comprises nine young people
from diverse backgrounds, including from regional and remote Australia, representing a wide range
of creative industries. A voucher scheme or ‘cultural pass’ to encourage young people to attend arts
events and activities is consistent with advice provided to Government by the Creative Industries
Youth Advisory Group.
Based on a 2025 election commitment, the Western Australian Government is currently scoping a
voucher scheme for youth engagement more generally, that is broader than music.
11
Recommendation 8:
4.36 The Committee recommends the Australian Government consider ways in which it could
partner with state and territory governments to improve the standard of music education in
primary schools.
4.37 This may include support for pilot projects to deliver quality music education in communities
of socio-economic disadvantage and an evaluation of the impacts of this on student
outcomes.
4.38 The Committee recommends the Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority
work closely with state and territory governments to ensure better incorporation of music
education into school curricula, with the aim of significantly increasing the number of children
studying music at primary and high school.
The Government notes this recommendation.
Version 9.0 of the Australian Curriculum, which was agreed by all education ministers on 1 April
2022, sets the expectations for what all Australian students should be taught regardless of where
they live, or their background. The states and territories either adopt the Australian Curriculum
directly or adapt it to align with local syllabus, approaches and priorities.
While the Australian Government plays a leadership role in setting and advocating for national
priorities in school education, it is the role of state and territory governments and non-government
school authorities to manage schools, including implementing the curriculum in line with
jurisdictional policies and requirements. These decisions are also made a at the school level to
ensure educational programs can be tailored to meet local community needs.
The intent of the Australian Curriculum: The Arts is that every student has the right to an excellent
and equitable arts education. The Arts: Music is a mandated subject of The Arts learning area which
is founded on the principle that every child has creative and expressive potential and learns as both
artist and audience.
State and territory governments have strategies and programs that deliver a wide range of music
education, training, performance and engagement opportunities for schools, students and teachers.
A guiding principal of the National Cultural Policy, Revive, is that every student should have the
opportunity to receive an education that includes culture, creativity, humanities and the arts;
including the Government’s continued support of creative practice in the classroom through the
delivery of five arts subjects (dance, drama, media arts, music and visual arts) under the Australian
Curriculum: The Arts.
In addition to its commitment under Revive to deliver song writing and recording initiatives in
schools, Music Australia plans to convene sessions with the music education sector to establish
strategic direction, form relationships and, where appropriate, develop co-investment models with
state and territory governments on strategic initiatives to support music education outcomes.
12
Recommendation 9:
4.39 The Committee recommends a minimum fee reflective of Award rates and conditions be
established for the hiring of musicians and performers at public events that are run,
sponsored or otherwise supported by the Australian Government, and that this fee be indexed
yearly by CPI or average wages.
The Government agrees in principle to this recommendation.
The Government recognises that artistic and cultural work is a professional activity and that fair
recognition for arts and cultural workers is essential. Artists engaged as employees are entitled to
the wages and conditions provided under the relevant award. The Government acknowledges, and
as stated in Revive, that artistic and cultural workers are often engaged as independent contractors,
not employees.
Through Revive, the Government has committed to expand income opportunities for artists,
increase opportunities for more diverse programming, support stronger cultural infrastructure, and
increase audiences for Australian original live music.
Revive recognises that artistic and cultural work is a professional activity and that fair pay and
conditions for arts and cultural workers are essential. It includes measures to improve the
circumstances of artist and arts workers including through appropriate remuneration.
Under Revive the Government has mandated minimum remuneration for professional musicians and
performers contracted by government entities at Australian Government events and functions. This
action supports the intentions of Pillar 3 of Revive: Centrality of the Artist which recognises artists as
workers and celebrates artists as creators.
Established under Creative Australia in 2023, Creative Workplaces provides advice on issues of pay,
safety and welfare in the arts and entertainment sector, refers matters to the relevant authorities
and develops codes of conduct and resources for the sector. The Creative Workplaces national
resources hub website was launched in June 2025.
13
Recommendation 10:
4.40 The Committee recommends the Australian Government partner with relevant stakeholders
to undertake research into the viability of a self-insurance or mutual insurance model for the
music industry and investigate other reforms and initiatives for insuring live music activities
that could result in lower premiums for presenters.
4.41 Further, the Committee recommends the Australian Government provide information on best
practice management of live music venues and events with a view to reducing both risk to
insurers and premiums for presenters.
4.42 The Committee recommends Music Australia partner with the Live Music Business Council and
the Insurance Council of Australia to develop a self-assessment app to provide a more
accurate prediction of risk and a more customised insurance premium to reflect the main
drivers of risk (outdoor events, multi-day events, late events, etc).
The Government notes point 4.40. The policy and regulatory settings for insurance are affected by
each level of government.
With support from Music Australia, an industry led analysis of insurance in the Australian music
festival industry commenced in September 2024, seeking to better understand the drivers behind
increasing insurance costs, the variability of insurance costs across different music festival types, and
assessing the viability of alternative models, such as a Discretionary Mutual Fund. This work is
ongoing.
The Government does not support point 4.41.
Industry professionals such as insurance brokers and industry associations are better placed to
provide advice on best practice management of live music venues and events. While the
Government is actively monitoring trends in the business insurance market, it does not have the
granular risk information to advise on best practice for industry. Live music businesses are
encouraged to work with their state and territory governments and explore, through insurance
brokers, whether there are any further actions they could take to lower the risk profile of their
business so that they can obtain cover.
The Government notes point 4.42. This recommendation is a matter for industry, in particular the
Australian Live Music Business Council.
14
Recommendation 11:
4.43 The Committee recommends the introduction of a new obligation for major international
tours to include Australian support acts as a condition of approval – a proposal commonly
referred to as ‘Michael’s Rule’.
The Government notes this recommendation.
Under Revive the Government will ensure that Australian music remains visible, discoverable and
easily accessible across platforms to all Australians, driven by a vibrant, agile, sustainable and
globally facing local music industry.
The Government acknowledges that requiring local artists to be placed on the same tours, stages
and promotional material as the biggest international acts can help showcase Australian talent to
new markets and diversify audiences.
A number of factors require careful consideration before introducing a new obligation for major
international tours, for example, defining "major" international tours, number of eligible support
acts per major tour and consideration of the current global political climate, including bilateral
agreements in place and specific country contexts.
To support ‘Michael’s Rule’, the New South Wales Government has launched an Australian-first
policy through Sound NSW, Venues NSW and Sydney Opera House that will offer reduced venue hire
fees for international touring acts that include Australian artists and performers in their concert line-
up.
15
Recommendation 12:
4.44 The Committee recommends the Australian Government conduct comprehensive research
into changes in audience behaviour and generational attitudes and behaviours that have
affected demand for live music.
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
Music Australia and its Council support the Australian music industry to grow, including through
strategic initiatives and industry partnerships, research, skills development and export promotion.
The Government committed ongoing funding to Music Australia to support these objectives. The
Music Australia Council is made up of senior policy advisors, musicians and key industry
representatives and provides strategic advice and guidance regarding the priority of investment,
development, and research needs of the contemporary music industry in Australia.
Recent research commissioned by Music Australia and conducted by Creative Australia’s research
team provides insights into how Australians discover and consume music along with audiences’
wider attitudes, behaviours and preferences.
In June 2025, the full Listening In research series was published by Music Australia. The series of
three parts contains:
 Insights on live music attendance
 Insights on music discovery and engagement
 A summary and synthesis of insights on music consumption
These reports aim to enhance understanding of local audience engagement. It will also inform
government policy that aims to support the Australian music industry, building on effective
mechanisms such as the Government’s Revive Live program.
The Government values robust research and evidence to inform policy decisions and will continue to
work with Music Australia regarding research into the behaviours, attitudes and demand for
Australian live music.
16
Recommendation 13:
4.45 The Committee recommends the Australian Government develop a centralised source of
information on compliance, age-based access, regulation, and training requirements across
national, state, territory and municipal jurisdictions that can inform the planning and
management of festivals and live music venues.
The Government notes this recommendation.
Revive outlined the need for a Creative Workforce Scoping Study to understand workforce
challenges and skills across the creative sector and inform industry driven solutions. Services and
Creative Skills Australia (SaCSA) engaged Creative Australia to deliver this study, which was released
in March 2025. The study will inform future workforce plans, vocational and education training
reviews and workforce initiatives.
The Soundcheck report released on 11 April 2024 produced by Creative Australia on behalf of Music
Australia, and in consultation with the Australian Festivals Association, provides further details on
national and state regulatory frameworks and permits and licences by state.
The Government notes that the proposed centralised source of information would be resource
intensive and challenging to maintain for currency and relevancy.
17
Recommendation 14:
4.46 The Committee recommends state and territory governments consider a reduction or
abolition of user-pays policing charges at music festivals.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government acknowledges that the actions of this recommendation are a matter for state and
territory regulation and police enforcement services in the context of health, safety and event
legislation in each state and territory and common law.
18
Recommendation 15:
4.47 The Committee recommends state and territory governments re-evaluate the need for large
police presences at live music events and the use of sniffer dogs and strip-searches.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government acknowledges that the actions of this recommendation are a matter for state and
territory regulation and police enforcement services in the context of health, safety and event
legislation in each state and territory and common law.
19
Recommendation 16:
4.48 The Committee recommends Austrade expand its support for Australian music exports to
support the global reach of Australian music.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government recognises the value and need for cultural exports to build relationships and
understanding of Australia in global perceptions. The Government is committed to building cultural
and creative exports through a multi-faceted approach. Revive provides a framework to strengthen
Australia’s musical exports through several actions:
 Take forward the Government’s trade diversification agenda to strengthen and expand trade
networks, including growing markets for cultural and creative exports.
 Support digital and international market development for Australian artists by increasing
funding for Sounds Australia to build on the growth achieved to date and to expand into
new markets.
Additionally, Austrade’s trade services help Australian businesses expand in overseas markets. For
example, Austrade services exporters at every stage of their journey through the Go Global Toolkit,
which offers a suite of free digital tools and resources including webinars, interactive tools, market
guides and how-to-articles.
 Since its launch in March 2021, the Toolkit has had more than 680,000 users, with an
average of 15,000 monthly unique users in 2024.
 Since the authenticated portal launched in March 2025, over 2,600 user accounts have been
created.
Austrade’s Go Global Toolkit has recently been expanded to now include the Go Global Export
Academy, which provides even more support to Australian businesses looking to accelerate their
export journey, with free webinars available live and on demand.
The Export Market Development Grants program, administered by Austrade, provides matched
grants for businesses to encourage the creation, development and expansion of foreign markets for
Australian products and services. The program is available for businesses that are ready to export or
exporting their products. It is available for eligible businesses in all sectors, including the music
industry.
The Australian Export Awards, recognises outstanding international success across 14 national
categories, including creative industries. This includes music, visual and performing arts, fashion,
design, film and television, digital media and content, animation, software and games, festival and
event production, writing and publishing and creative services.
In addition, Music Australia’s Export Development Fund is a matched funding scheme that offers
targeted support for emerging, breakthrough and established artists at different career junctures by
providing a bespoke grant program that targets three specific areas of international export:
 International Performance and Touring Activity
 International Professional and Artistic Development, and
 International Market and Audience Development
20
As one of Music Australia’s delivery partners, Sounds Australia - Australia’s export music market
initiative - will receive annual funding from January 2025 – December 2028 to deliver Australia’s
contemporary music export program.
The Government will continue to work with Austrade, Sounds Australia and Music Australia to
support the global reach of Australian music and exports to global markets.
21
Recommendation 17:
4.49 The Committee recommends the Australian Government undertake research on business
models for live music that do not require dependence on the sale of alcohol.
The Government does not support this recommendation.
The Government is not best placed to advise on business models. This is a matter for industry to
consider.
22
Recommendation 18:
4.50 The Committee recommends state, territory and local governments support the development
of dedicated and permanent outdoor live music spaces (such as sound shells and associated
equipment and infrastructure) to reduce the marginal cost of staging events for presenters.
4.51 The Committee recommends state, territory and local governments support private sector
efforts to establish permanent and dedicated festival sites in 79 regional settings that are
resilient against extreme weather events and ensure these sites are served with appropriate
amenities.
4.52 The Committee recommends state, territory and local governments re-evaluate their pricing
regimes for government-operated venues and provide concessional fees to presenters
fulfilling cultural imperatives.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government considers this recommendation is a matter for state, territory and local
governments. The policy and regulatory settings of local infrastructure projects fall with the
jurisdictions who also hold responsibility over budget priorities.
23
Recommendation 19:
4.53 The Committee recommends the Australian Government consider supporting live music
event-related training programs for young people.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government has established Service and Creative Skills Australia (SaCSA), the Jobs and Skills
Council for the Arts, Personal Services, Retail, Tourism and Hospitality sectors (the Council) to
provide the sector with a stronger, more strategic voice and greater participation in the skills and
training sector.
The Council will work closely with Jobs and Skills Australia and be responsible for identifying and
addressing workforce challenges, driving collaboration across sectors and delivering high-quality
training products that meet the skills needs of the sector.
On 20 March 2024 the then Minister for Youth, the Hon. Dr Anne Aly launched the Australian
Government’s youth engagement strategy Engage! A strategy to include young people in the
decisions we make to embed the voices of young Australians in policy and programs across
government, including in arts and culture.
Revive outlined the need for a Creative Workforce Scoping Study to understand workforce
challenges and skills across the creative sector and inform industry driven solutions. SaCSA engaged
Creative Australia to deliver this study.
Creative Australia’s Creative Workforce Scoping Study report was released in March 2025. The study
will inform future workforce plans, vocational and education training reviews and workforce
initiatives, including programs for young people.
Under the 2024–2028 National Skills Agreement, the Government is investing up to $12.6 billion to
expand and transform the Vocational Education and Training (VET) sector. This funding comprises up
to $11.3 billion in flexible funding to support state and territory skills systems and $1.3 billion to
implement key policy initiatives.
Within this funding framework, states and territories are responsible for the delivery of VET in their
jurisdictions, including decisions relating to the funding of courses and training organisations.
Music Australia invests in youth music organisation The Push, as a multiyear delivery partner. Key
objectives include:
 Provide a program of creative skills and small business practice development programs to
support young people;
 Create and deliver programs to increase the capacity of the sector to sustain rewarding and
viable careers.
CrewCare received seed funding from Music Australia to research and consult with the live music
industry sectors in each state and territory regarding the feasibility of expanding their industry-led
and managed training program nationally.
This seed funding will assist in creating a proposal for a tailored national Pathway to Jobs in Live
Music training program which could be developed sufficiently for national rollout. A thorough
consultation process will be conducted, with a project management team visiting each state and
24
territory to undertake meetings and forums with local stakeholders from all sectors of the live music
industry. This will assist in identifying the training needs of each region.
25
Recommendation 20:
4.54 The Committee recommends the Australian Government work with music streaming services
to increase the proportion of Australian content that algorithms or automated playlists
generate for Australian users, and that if co-operation is not forthcoming that legislation be
strongly considered to mandate and enforce higher proportions of Australian music on these
services.
The Government notes this recommendation.
Under Revive, the Government has committed to ensuring that Australian music remains visible,
discoverable and easily accessible across platforms to all Australians, driven by a vibrant, agile,
sustainable and globally facing local music industry.
One of Music Australia’s key focus areas is to promote the visibility and prominence of Australian
music content through sector discussions, and by investing in marketing campaigns and partnering
with third party initiatives. Music Australia is currently working with industry to better understand
the needs of the music sector which includes music streaming services.
The Government will continue to work with Music Australia and its Council on how best to support
the sector.
26
