OFFICIAL
Australian Government response to the
Rural and Regional Affairs and Transport References
Committee reports:
Australia’s preparedness to host the Commonwealth,
Olympic and Paralympic Games
Interim Report (September 2023)
Second Interim Report (December 2023)
and
Final Report (April 2025)
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Introduction
The Australian Government (the Government) is providing a response to the Senate Rural
and Regional Affairs and Transport References Committee’s (the Committee) interim,
second interim and final reports of the inquiry into Australia’s preparedness to host the
Commonwealth, Olympic and Paralympic Games.
On 30 March 2023, the Senate referred the matter to the Committee for inquiry and report
by 1 September 2023. The Committee’s inquiry was subsequently extended to 6 May 2025.
The Government notes that there were no recommendations in the final report, with 24
recommendations raised in interim reports. As the Committee’s final report notes, several
of the recommendations have been addressed since their release and the Government
continues to work collaboratively with stakeholders to make the Brisbane 2032 Olympic and
Paralympic Games a success for all Australians.
The Olympic and Paralympic Games coming to Brisbane in 2032 provides a unique
opportunity to engage Australian communities, reinforcing unity, health and wellbeing and
celebrating an enduring love of sport. The Government is working to maximise the impact of
hosting this pinnacle global event, and secure a range of benefits for Queensland, Australia
and the broader Oceania region.
Collaboration across all Games Delivery Partners1 will be fundamental to successful
planning, delivery and maximising the positive impacts of the Brisbane 2032 Games. The
Government speaks from experience. Its recent success in hosting major international
sporting events in Australia, notably the 2023 FIFA Women’s World Cup, was based on
genuine engagement and collaboration with delivery partners and other key stakeholders.
Government contributions to the Brisbane 2032 Games include direct financial support,
record investment in venue and transport infrastructure, in-kind provision of operational
services in areas of Commonwealth responsibility (including for instance, national security
arrangements, intellectual property rights protection, and anti-doping arrangements).
The Government is also considering strategic opportunities to leverage the Brisbane 2032
Games to achieve broader policy priorities in areas such as trade and tourism, diplomacy,
community sport participation, inclusion, reconciliation and high performance sport.
The Government would like to thank the Committee for its work in preparing the interim,
second interim and final reports. The Government acknowledges the additional comments
and dissenting reports made by the Labor Senators and Australian Greens.
The Government is making unprecedented investment towards Australia’s next Games in
Brisbane and will continue to work with Games Delivery Partners to ensure this once-in-a-
generation opportunity delivers positive outcomes for Australia.
1 Games Delivery Partners: Australian Government, Queensland Government, Brisbane City Council, Sunshine
Coast Council, Gold Coast Council, South East Queensland Council of Mayors, Australian Olympic Committee,
Paralympics Australia, Brisbane 2032 Games Organising Committee, Games Independent Infrastructure and
Coordination Authority.
2
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Australian Government Response to Recommendations
Key Theme: 2026 Commonwealth Games
Interim Report Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the Australian Government takes on a facilitation and
coordination role in order to salvage the 2026 Commonwealth Games being held in
Australia. Before the end of 2023, the Australian Government should:
• establish an intergovernmental forum, through National Cabinet or a bespoke
mechanism, bringing together representatives from all three levels of government,
business associations and community groups, to examine options to salvage the
Commonwealth Games;
• direct the Departments of Health and Aged Care and Infrastructure, Transport,
Regional Development, Communications and the Arts to produce low, medium and
high funding options for the Australian Government that would enable the
Commonwealth Games to be salvaged and hosted in 2026; and
• subject to the above, and in coordination with any other relevant stakeholders,
including Gold Coast City Council and other local governments, enter into discussions
with Commonwealth Games Federation and Commonwealth Games Australia about
prospects for hosting the Games, including a reduced or decentralised Games if
necessary.
Interim Report Recommendation 2
If stakeholders cannot agree on an approach to salvage the Games, the committee
recommends that the Australian Government develops a policy to address the missed
opportunities and impacts from the cancellation of Victoria 2026. The policy, developed in
consultation with National Sporting Organisations and National Sporting Organisations
for People with Disability, should:
• identify which sports and disciplines have been disproportionately impacted by the
cancellation, for example those that were relying on 2026 as a pathway to the 2028
Summer Olympics in Los Angeles (LA 2028) and Brisbane 2032, or which have not yet
featured at the Olympics and Paralympics (for example, netball);
• enable paralympic athletes to access classification events internationally; and
• address a shortfall in infrastructure which will not now be funded.
Interim Report Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the Australian Government encourages the Victorian
Government to prioritise the delivery of its $2 billion alternative rural and regional funding
package, including by publicly releasing full details on where funding will be allocated,
what projects it will be allocated to, and accountable timeframes for delivery.
Second Interim Report Recommendation 16
The committee recommends that the Australian Government lead the development with
interested stakeholders of an Australian bid to host the 2026 Commonwealth Games.
Additionally, the committee recommends the Australian Government provide public
reasoning for any decisions made on the proposals.
3
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Second Interim Report Recommendation 17
The committee recommends the Australian Government comprehensively review, and
report to Parliament, the missed economic, social, and legacy opportunities following the
cancellation of the 2026 Commonwealth Games. This review and report should include the
impact on Athletes and the proposed regional host communities of Bendigo, Ballarat,
Gippsland, and Geelong.
Government response
The Government notes Interim Report Recommendations 1 and 2 and Second Interim
Report Recommendation 16.
Glasgow will host the 2026 Commonwealth Games. The Government considers these
recommendations require no further action.
The decision to host a major sporting event is a matter for state and territory governments.
It is a state and territory government that enters into a host contract with the event
organising body and is responsible for delivery. The Government cannot produce funding
options to support events without a host jurisdiction or host contract in place.
The Government notes that prior to the first public hearing of this Senate Inquiry, all state
and territory leaders had publicly ruled out bidding for the 2026 Commonwealth Games.
This position was confirmed on multiple occasions in meetings between the Australian and
state and territory governments at various levels.
There were no changes to the Government’s funding for National Sporting Organisations
(NSOs) and National Sporting Organisations for people with a Disability (NSODs) as a result
of the Victorian Government’s decision to withdraw as host of the 2026 Commonwealth
Games.
The Australian Sports Commission (ASC) works closely with Olympic, Paralympic and
Commonwealth Games sports to support athletes, coaches and performance support staff
in the lead up to their pinnacle sporting events. More information on the Government’s
investment in support of Australia’s high performance athletes and pathways can be found
under the ‘high performance funding’ key theme.
The Government does not support Interim Report Recommendation 4 or Second Interim
Report Recommendation 17.
Unilateral funding decisions taken by state and territory governments remain matters for
consideration by those state and territory governments and parliaments.
The Parliament of Victoria held an inquiry into the 2026 Commonwealth Games bid and
produced a comprehensive final report in April 20252. The report includes information both
on the status of the Victorian Government’s rural and regional funding package, and the
impact of the Victorian Government’s withdrawal as host.
2 Reports - Inquiry into the 2026 Commonwealth Games Bid - Parliament of Victoria
4
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Key Theme: Brisbane 2032 Olympic and Paralympic Games – Infrastructure
Interim Report Recommendation 5
The committee recommends the Australian Government works with the Queensland
Government, affected communities and Olympics Games organising bodies to urgently
review the decision to host Athletics events at the Gabba stadium and the associated
plans to demolish the East Brisbane State School and temporarily remove community
access to Raymond Park. The review should consider the feasibility of alternative options,
including using existing infrastructure, and work to find a solution that is acceptable to
these communities.
Interim Report Recommendation 6
If the result of a review of the Gabba stadium decision still requires the demolition of the
East Brisbane School, the Queensland Government should work with the local community
to build a new school in closer proximity to the existing school than the proposed
Coorparoo school.
Interim Report Recommendation 7
The committee recommends the Australian Government works through an
intergovernmental forum, such as National Cabinet, to explore the most cost-effective
solution for hosting the canoe slalom events at the Brisbane 2032 Games. If it is feasible to
host the events at the Penrith Whitewater Centre in New South Wales, including with
refurbishments, this option should be prioritised over building a new facility.
Second Interim Report Recommendation 3
The committee reiterates its recommendation in the first interim report and recommends
that the Australian Government works with the Queensland Government to halt the
redevelopment of the Brisbane Cricket Ground (Gabba) until such time that a review of the
business case and a socioeconomic cost benefit analysis of the decision to redevelop the
Gabba has been completed. This business case should consider the costs of relocating the
East Brisbane State School, as stated in the first interim report, as well as the additional
costs of displacing sporting codes that currently use the Gabba.
Second Interim Report Recommendation 8
The committee recommends the Australian Parliament consider amendments to the
Infrastructure Australia Amendment (Independent Review) Bill 2023 to expand
Infrastructure Australia’s functions to include nationally significant social infrastructure
and provide a greater level of overview for the Brisbane Live Arena project.
Second Interim Report Recommendation 9
The committee recommends the Australian Government work cohesively with the
Queensland Government to ensure completion of the Sunshine Coast Direct Line from
Beerwah to Maroochydore. To de-risk the delivery timelines the project should be
delivered in 2029–30 as set out in the March 2022–23 Budget to ensure the rail is
operational well in advance of the Brisbane 2032 Games.
Second Interim Report Recommendation 10
The committee recommends the Australian Government provide greater clarity and
transparency on the delivery of infrastructure projects for the Brisbane 2032 Games, or for
projects that will have an impact on the Games. As part of this work the committee also
5
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
recommends that the business case for the Brisbane Live Arena be put to Infrastructure
Australia for assessment to ensure it meets the Australian Government’s infrastructure
priorities.
Government response
The Government notes Interim Report Recommendations 5, 6 and 7, and Second Interim
Report Recommendations 3, 8, 9 and 10.
As the Committee’s final report notes, several of the recommendations made in the interim
and second interim reports have been addressed.
The Intergovernmental Agreement (IGA) on the Brisbane 2032 Olympic and Paralympic
Games3 outlines the framework for the Government’s enduring partnership with the
Queensland Government on Games venue projects.
The venue infrastructure projects the Government is investing in can be found in the IGA.
The Queensland Government is responsible for working alongside the International Olympic
Committee to finalise the location of Olympic sports based on sporting and host contract
requirements.
The Government currently administers a number of measures to ensure transparency and
clarity around delivery of infrastructure project for the Brisbane 2032 Games. Accountability
mechanisms are prescribed in the IGA and the Government’s investment in venue
infrastructure is supported by project validation reports (or business cases) and
independent assurance work to ensure value for money and long-term community benefits.
Milestones for project payments are outlined in the related Federation Funding Agreement
(FFA) published online at: www.federalfinancialrelations.gov.au.
The IGA’s rigorous, self-contained arrangements give a high level of assurance over the
projects, including joint Australian and Queensland Government selection of design and
delivery partners, review under the Queensland Gateway Review process, independent
health checks, and a requirement for the Queensland Government to provide updates and
advice on project issues.
On Second Interim Report Recommendation 8, the Infrastructure Australia Act 2008 already
defines ‘nationally significant infrastructure’ as including social infrastructure.
The Government is working collaboratively with the Queensland Government on transport
projects necessary to help with the movement of athletes, officials and spectators for the
Brisbane 2032 Games.
The Government will consider funding requests as part of its usual budget processes.
3 Published on Federation.gov.au. The IGA is subject to updates. Further information can be found in the 3 July
2025 media release https://minister.infrastructure.gov.au/c-king/media-release/2032-games-infrastructure-
funding-deal-confirmed.
6
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Key Theme: Brisbane 2032 Olympic and Paralympic Games – Regional
Queensland and legacy
Second Interim Report Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with the Queensland
Government to undertake a review of the potential benefits and opportunities on offer
across regional Queensland to support the Brisbane 2032 Games, improve sports
outcomes, and subsequently boost regional development. This review should:
• include an audit of all sporting infrastructure in regional Queensland to assess the
quality, size, and location of venues to maximise use of venues including through
multi-use facilities, reduce duplication and identify infrastructure gaps that act as a
barrier to sport participation and high performance outcomes; and
• build on the work of the Local Government Association of Queensland's sports
inventory project.
Second Interim Report Recommendation 2
The committee recommends against any further upgrades to sporting infrastructure in
Brisbane to replace events displaced by the construction of Olympics infrastructure.
Instead, the committee recommends that:
• the Australian Government and the Queensland Governments work with affected
sporting codes to upgrade infrastructure outside of Brisbane to provide more tangible
legacy outcomes from the 2032 Games; and
• the Australian Government establishes a 2032 Olympics Rural and Remote Queensland
funding program to ensure that areas outside South East Queensland receive equitable
funding for essential infrastructure and community facilities to maximise and broaden
the benefits of the Brisbane 2032 Games.
Second Interim Report Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the Australian Government works with the Queensland
Government to update the Brisbane 2032 legacy strategy, Elevate 2042, to include specific
focus areas on regional infrastructure and tourism. This work should also consider
consolidating the four separate focus areas that currently target environmental issues
(Focus 7, 8, 9 and 10) and ensure focus areas are adequate to support a lasting legacy
following the Olympic Games.
Second Interim Report Recommendation 6
The committee recommends that the Australian Government actively engage with the
Queensland Government to:
• undertake a housing needs analysis in Games locations, with a view to mobilising all
levels of government and stakeholders in the housing industry to coordinate responses
in identifying opportunities to increase housing supply without impacts to housing
affordability; and
• agree a co-funding arrangement that ensures the athlete’s accommodation is
converted into social and affordable housing when the Games conclude.
7
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Government response
The Government notes Second Interim Report Recommendations 1, 2, 4 and 6.
The Government has committed up to $3.435 billion for Brisbane 2032 Games venue
infrastructure, outlined in the IGA. This commitment includes capped funding for regional
venues identified by the Queensland Government as necessary for Brisbane 2032 Games
events and legacy outcomes.
The Government also has a range of open and competitive grants programs for capital
works projects available to regional communities throughout Australia.
The Government is committed to improving opportunities for community participation in
sport and physical activity across Australia. The Play Our Way grant program – a
$200 million investment giving women and girls greater opportunity to access, participate
and stay involved in sport and physical activity – is a clear example of this commitment.
Australia’s National Sport Strategy 2024-2034, Sport Horizon4, will guide the Government’s
investment in Australia’s sport sector to drive healthy, active and connected communities.
The Government supported the development of Elevate 20425 in 2023 and is committed to
ensuring the Brisbane 2032 Games have broad legacy impacts not just in South East
Queensland, but across Australia and the Pacific. This already includes focus areas targeting
the tourism sector and greater housing accessibility and affordability in target locations.
Elevate 2042 and subsequent implementation plans are the collective work of all Games
Delivery Partners. Any changes to its focus areas will be at the discretion of that cohort.
Location, design and funding of athletes’ villages are a matter for the Queensland
Government. The Government notes the intention of Queensland to convert a portion of
these villages to a mix of housing types following the Brisbane 2032 Games.
4 National Sport Strategy 2024-2034
5 cdn.giica.au/documents/ELEVATE 2042 Legacy Strategy_FULL LENGTH.pdf
8
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Key Theme: Brisbane 2032 Olympic and Paralympic Games – Governance
Second Interim Report Recommendation 5
The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with the Queensland
Government to appoint a regional Queensland community leader to the board of the
Brisbane 2032 Organising Committee. The community leader should act as a liaison for
consultation, decision-making and ensure effective regional representation.
Second Interim Report Recommendation 7
The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with the Queensland
Government to explore options to improve transparency and accountability mechanisms.
As part of this process, an independent and integrated Olympic Coordination Authority,
with representation from all three levels of government should be considered as an
alternative governance arrangement.
Second Interim Report Recommendation 13
The committee recommends that the Australian Government undertake more frequent
meetings with the whole-of-government Inter-Departmental Committee to discuss
arrangements for visas in the lead up to the Brisbane 2032 Olympic and Paralympic
Games, and any other upcoming events to ensure swift access can be provided to athletes,
coaches, and officials, particularly from neighbouring Pacific Island nations.
Government response
The Government notes Second Interim Report Recommendations 5, 7 and 13.
As the Committee’s final report notes, several of the recommendations made in the interim
and second interim reports have been addressed since their release.
The governance for the Brisbane 2032 Games is set out in the Brisbane Olympic and
Paralympic Games Arrangements Act 2021 (Qld). Under the IGA, the Government has
accountability mechanisms as well as protections for governance arrangements to ensure
the Government’s representation in Brisbane 2032 Games matters.
The Government continues to work collaboratively with the Queensland Government to
ensure representation on Brisbane 2032 Games governance forums remains relevant and
appropriate to its level of investment and areas of responsibility.
The Government has also committed to supporting the hosting of the Brisbane 2032 Games
through delivery of operational support services, including in relation to national security,
visas, telecommunications and so on. To support the delivery of these commitments, the
Office for Sport convenes regular Interdepartmental Committee meetings. The frequency of
these meetings may increase in the lead up to the Brisbane 2032 Games, however, is
currently fit for purpose.
9
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Key Theme: Major sporting events funding and policy
Interim Report Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the Australian Government develops guidelines for
future major sporting events which make Commonwealth funding, regulatory, policy and
operational support conditional on state and territory governments being required to
notify the Australian Government well in advance of cancelling, or making major changes
to, a major sporting event for which hosting rights have been awarded.
Second Interim Report Recommendation 11
The committee recommends that the Australian Government through the Office for Sport,
progress the establishment of a national strategy for major sporting events in
collaboration with all governments, sporting associations and event organisers to
maximise Australia’s sporting events calendar and the subsequent participation,
economic, social, and legacy benefits.
Second Interim Report Recommendation 12
The committee recommends that the Australian Government develops guidelines for
future major sporting events which make Commonwealth funding, regulatory, policy and
operational support conditional on state and territory governments providing concrete,
measurable evidence of the legacy benefits for the community, and evidence that they
have undertaken timely, adequate, and meaningful consultation with communities before
making decisions on venues and infrastructure.
Government response
The Government notes Interim Report Recommendation 3 and supports in principle
Second Interim Report Recommendations 11 and 12.
The Government will not seek to replace or duplicate the role of states and territories as
host governments for major sporting events.
Where the Government is supporting the funding and/or delivery of events, it expects close
collaboration with the organisers and host state and territory governments, including clear
and timely communications. Funding agreements between the Government and event
organisers already contain clauses relating to ‘changes with material effect’ for major
sporting events and appropriate notice periods to the government in these circumstances.
The Government developed Sport Horizon with and for the Australian sport sector. It sets a
collective vision and priorities for sport in Australia over the next decade.
The focus of Sport Horizon is on sport, including organised sport, development pathways
and high performance. Given the health and wellbeing benefits of an active lifestyle and
emerging pathways into sport, Sport Horizon also seeks to leverage opportunities created
through active recreation and physical activity in schools and the community.
Sport Horizon will maximise the opportunities created by the decade of major sporting
events leading up to and including the Brisbane 2032 Games.
10
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
In 2024 the Government published the Major Sporting Events Legacy Framework6 to provide
guidance to sporting organisations seeking support. It helps the Government consider which
proposals offer the greatest return on investment and broadest legacy impacts in line with
strategic objectives.
6 Major Sporting Events Legacy Framework | Australian Government Department of Health and Aged Care
11
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Key Theme: High performance funding
Second Interim Report Recommendation 14
The committee recommends that the Australian Government review current funding
mechanisms and investment levels for Australian Sports Commission funded
Commonwealth, Olympic and Paralympic Games sports and their associations to ensure
funding levels are appropriate and sufficient to meet the needs of athletes and their teams
to produce successful outcomes in upcoming major events including Paris 2024 and
through to Brisbane 2032. This review should also recognise additional para-athlete
qualification requirements.
Second Interim Report Recommendation 15
The committee recommends that the Australian Government does not relocate the
Australian Institute of Sport (AIS) from Canberra. Any funding that would be required to
relocate the AIS should instead be invested into upgrading the current AIS location in
Bruce, Canberra to ensure the facility is fit-for-purpose and can support the needs of
Australia's athletes leading up to and beyond the Brisbane 2032 Games.
Government response
The Government notes Second Interim Report Recommendation 14 and supports Second
Interim Report Recommendation 15.
In the 2024-25 Federal Budget, the ASC received a record investment of $283.5 million to
support athletes, coaches and support staff starting preparations for the Los Angeles 2028
Olympic and Paralympic Games cycle. This is the largest ever investment from the
Government in Olympic and Paralympic sports to help Australian athletes achieve success
on world stages. This new funding is in addition to existing $102.8 million annual ASC base
high-performance funding and brings the Government’s total high-performance investment
to $489.0 million over two years.
This boost to high-performance funding will strengthen Australia’s position as a world
leading sporting nation in the lead up to the Brisbane 2032 Games. It will create more
opportunities and better development pathways for high-performance athletes to thrive,
win well and inspire the next generation of healthier Australians.
The investment provides support for recruitment and retention of athletes, coaches and
leadership personnel; ensures athletes have the day-to-day resources, support and guidance
for training and preparation to achieve international success; and supports access to
appropriate domestic and international competitions. Programs that will support high-
performance athletes now, and in the lead up to, the Brisbane 2032 Games include:
• High-Performance Grants to national sporting organisations ($118.5 million).
• Olympic and Paralympic Fund ($40.5 million to cover increased competition costs).
• Performance Pathways and Athlete Pathways Grants ($51.9 million) to support
athletes to reach their potential.
• Paralympic sport uplift to address systemic and structural barriers to performance
including para-athlete qualification requirements ($54.9 million).
12
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
• Direct Athlete Support Grants to assist with cost-of-living pressures ($17.6 millions).
This provides direct financial support to more than 900 athletes across 30
NSOs/NSODs training in Olympic, Paralympic and Commonwealth Games sports.
The Government also announced $2.058 million investment on 22 June 2025 to support the
Australian Team for the Milano Cortina 2026 Paralympic Games.
On 10 May 2024, the Government announced a $249.7 million investment to upgrade AIS
facilities in Canberra to ensure they are modern and world-leading. This investment
followed the Independent Review into AIS Infrastructure and will see the construction of
three new high performance sport facilities at the existing AIS campus.
The ASC anticipates construction to be complete by early 2027 to enhance athlete
preparations in the leadup to the Los Angeles 2028 Olympic and Paralympic Games, the
Brisbane 2032 Games and beyond.
The ASC is connected with the ACT Government to participate in preliminary discussions
regarding the Masterplan for the broader Bruce, Australian Capital Territory precinct.
13
OFFICIAL
