OFFICIAL
Australian Government Response to the
Senate Standing Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade Legislation
Committee Inquiry Report into
Issues Relating to advocacy services for veterans accessing
compensation and income support
December 2025
1
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Introduction
The Australian Government recognises veterans’ advocacy plays a crucial role in ensuring
veterans and families who require it, receive informed, accurate and timely advice in their
engagement with the Department of Veterans’ Affairs.
On 26 August 2025, the Senate re-referred an inquiry into advocacy services relating to
veteran compensation and income support to the Senate Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade
References Committee (The Committee) for inquiry and report.
The Committee tabled its final report 4 November 2025.
The Government’s response to the recommendations of the Report follows below. The
Government thanks the Committee for its work on the inquiry, as well as those who provided
submissions and appeared at hearings.
2
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Australian Government response to the
Senate Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade References Committee
Inquiry Report into
Issues relating to advocacy services for veterans accessing compensation and income support
# Committee Recommendations Government response
Agreed.
The Government recognises an increasing prevalence of commercial
The committee recommends that the Department of Veterans’
veteran advocacy practices that seek to put profits ahead of veteran
Affairs explore potential legislative action to curb harmful and
health and wellbeing.
1 deceptive business practices in the commercial veterans’
advocacy sector, including but not limited to the imposition of
The Government is investigating legislative and policy responses to
fee caps.
address exploitative fee practices of commercial advocates, including
charging commission-based fees and other irregular practices, and will
consult with the sector in relation to specific proposals to take forward.
Agreed.
The committee recommends that the Department of Veterans’
Affairs and Department of Defence initiate a targeted public The Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) is undertaking a targeted
2 education and awareness campaign to better inform current and public awareness ‘Making a Claim’ education initiative. As part of this
former Australian Defence Force personnel of the potential risks initiative the Department is sharing real life stories from veterans who
of engaging commercial, fee-for-service veterans’ advocates. have experienced challenges when seeking support to lodge
compensation and rehabilitation claims.
3
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
These deidentified stories, drawn from submissions to the recent Senate
inquiry into veterans’ advocacy services, highlight the risks some
veterans have faced when engaging fee-for-service advocates. They
serve as a powerful reminder of the importance of veterans’
understanding their options, and their rights, before making a claim.
Agreed-in-principle.
The committee recommends that the Australian Government The Government supports veterans having access to transparent,
3 explore measures to require transparency in advertising and comprehensive information about commercial advocacy services
service agreements from all entities offering veterans’ advocacy. including in relation to costs to assist them to make informed decisions.
The Government will seek to address these issues as part of its work
outlined in response to Recommendation 1.
Agreed.
The committee recommends that the Department of Veterans’
Affairs investigate solutions to address the specific national
4 The Government acknowledges the national security and personal
security and personal privacy risks posed by offshore
privacy risks posed by offshore advocacy providers and data handling
commercial advocacy providers and offshore data handling.
and is investigating legislative and policy responses to this risk.
Noted.
The committee recommends the establishment of a National
The Government recognises the importance of ensuring that veterans
Veterans’ Legal Service based on the former Defence and
and their families can access appropriate advice and assistance to
5 Veterans’ Legal Service and current Veterans’ Advocacy
support their engagement with compensation and income support
Service run through Legal Aid New South Wales and funded
systems. Veterans may be able to access to Australian Government-
through the National Access to Justice Partnership.
funded legal assistance through the National Access to Justice
Partnership 2025-2030 (NAJP), which commenced on 1 July 2025.
Under the NAJP, matters relating to military entitlements and
4
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
compensation claims are identified as a Commonwealth civil law
priority, guiding legal assistance services to prioritise support in these
areas.
The Government also notes that the Veterans’ Review Board review
pathway allows for a more veteran-friendly merits review process that is
more accessible and does not require legal representation. The Board’s
framework enables applicants to participate in a fair and just review
process that aims to reach the correct or preferable decision, maintaining
procedural fairness without formal legal advocacy.
Agreed-in-principle.
The Government agrees to improving compensation and wellbeing
The committee recommends the Australian Government
advocacy, including funding compensation advocacy services that are
6 implement Recommendation 99 of the Royal Commission into
provided at no cost to veterans. The Government will provide an
Defence and Veteran Suicide as a matter of urgency.
increase in funding and restructure the BEST Program which supports
free-to-the-veteran advocacy.
Agreed.
The committee recommends that the Department of Veterans’
Affairs work closely with the Institute of Veterans Advocacy
The Government supports the Institute of Veterans Advocacy as the
(IVA) as it becomes operational to ensure that it provides
national professional association for the veteran advocacy sector.
effective professional oversight and regulation of the veterans’
7
advocacy sector.
The Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) will work closely with the
IVA as it becomes operational, as the national professional association
As part of this, the Australian Government should provide
for veteran advocates. The Government will provide IVA with $3.0
sufficient funding to the IVA to ensure its financial viability and
million in initial funding to enable the IVA to complete its
consider how elements of the Office of the Migration Agents
establishment activities.
5
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Regulation Authority could be usefully applied to the IVA and
the regulation of the veterans’ advocacy sector. The effectiveness and financial viability of the IVA will be reviewed at
an appropriate interval.
After two years of operation, the Australian Government should
formally evaluate the effectiveness and financial viability of the
IVA.
6
OFFICIAL
