Australian Government response to the
Finance and Public Administration References Committee report:
Management and assurance of integrity by consulting services
December 2025
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the opportunity to respond to the Senate Finance and
Public Administration References Committee (the Committee) final report from their Inquiry
into the Management and assurances of integrity by consulting services (Consulting Services
Inquiry).
The Committee tabled its final report on 12 June 2024, making 12 recommendations; this
Government response addresses 11 of these recommendations, with PricewaterhouseCoopers
(PwC) Australia to respond to the remaining recommendation. The Australian Government
recognises the importance of this report and its recommendations and agrees, agrees in
principle or agrees in part with eight of the Committee’s recommendations and notes two
recommendations. Recommendation 11 is not supported.
The Australian Greens made a further 22 recommendations. The Australian Government
notes these recommendations.
The Government expects its suppliers to conduct themselves with high standards of ethics
such that they consistently act with integrity and accountability. The Australian Government
has undertaken a range of actions to strengthen supplier integrity and contract transparency,
many of which already address the recommendations in this report. Additionally, several
Committee recommendations are already being addressed through reforms currently
underway.
These initiatives form a range of measures undertaken by the Australian Government to
further bolster integrity protections following the breach of confidentiality by PwC Australia
during consultations with the Department of the Treasury (Treasury) on the development of
tax laws. The Government is committed to taking action to deter consultant misconduct and
strengthen the resilience of regulatory frameworks.
On 15 August 2023, the Government announced a package of reforms to strengthen the
integrity of the tax system, increase the powers of government regulatory bodies, and
strengthen regulatory arrangements to ensure they are fit for purpose. The reform package
builds on earlier measures to improve government processes including new legislation to
strengthen the Tax Practitioners Board. The introduction of the Commonwealth Supplier
Code of Conduct in July 2024 established the minimum expectations of suppliers while under
contract to the Commonwealth, and Code clauses provides structure to both suppliers and
Commonwealth entities on how supplier misconduct will be handled
This work also complements the Australian Government’s Australian Public Service (APS)
Reform agenda, which aims to reduce the Commonwealth’s reliance on contractors and
consultants and rebuild capability within the APS.
The Government provides the following response to the Committee’s recommendations.
2
Response to Recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that PwC be open and honest with the Australian Parliament
and people, and with the international community, by promptly publishing accurate and
detailed information about the involvement of PwC partners and personnel (including
names and positions) in the breach of confidential government information.
Response: This recommendation is for PwC to respond to.
3
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that the Department of Finance update the Contract
Management Guide to require that Australian Government contracts include a clause that
states service providers have a duty to act in the public interest when delivering work for
the Australian Government.
Response: The Government agrees in principle the recommendation.
The Commonwealth expects its suppliers to conduct themselves with high standards of ethics
such that they consistently act with integrity and accountability. The Australian Government
has developed the Commonwealth Supplier Code of Conduct (Code) as a key measure to
strengthen supplier behaviour. The Code sets out the Government’s expectation for suppliers
to uphold similar values and behaviours to those expected of public officials in the APS
Values. The Code notes that the standards and values expected of public servants are not
expressed in terms of public interest.
The Code, which came into effect on 1 July 2024, places obligations on suppliers and their
subcontractors to act ethically while under contract with the Commonwealth. In particular,
Expectation 1.4 – Emulate the Australian Public Service (APS) Values, states: “When a
supplier is undertaking work on behalf of the Commonwealth, they must uphold similar
values and behaviours to those expected of public officials in the APS Values. This is always
important, but particularly relevant where a supplier interacts with, or provides services to,
the Australian Public”.
The Commonwealth Contracting Suite and ClauseBank include standard clauses for inclusion
in Commonwealth contracts, placing contractual obligations on suppliers to meet the
expectations set out by the Code. Guidance for Commonwealth entities is available on the
Department of Finance (Finance) website to assist officials manage these contractual
obligations. Additionally, the Contract Management Guide, updated in August 2025,
reinforces the importance of managing the ethical conduct of suppliers and ensures officials
responsible for managing Commonwealth contracts are aware of the obligations of all parties
under the Code.
4
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the Department of Finance improve the training of
officials undertaking procurement to ensure that the Australian Public Service is
adequately equipped to ensure that value for money is obtained in circumstances where it
is deemed necessary to engage consultants.
Response: The Government agrees the recommendation.
In late 2022 Finance commenced an APS wide procurement and contract management
capability uplift program. This program included the launch of the Procurement and Contract
Management Profession and the creation of the Commonwealth Procurement and Contract
Management Training Suite in line with Recommendation 1 of the Joint Committee of Public
Accounts and Audit Report 498: Commitment Issues – An Inquiry into Commonwealth
Procurement.
The Suite now offers 18 courses for public officials, covering procurement and contract
management basics and in-practice, probity and integrity, value for money, and delegate
courses, all emphasising ethical behaviour.
As of 12 November 2025, Finance has delivered 372 facilitated sessions with over 11,700
attendances and there have been over 3,200 eLearning course completions.
The Profession provides opportunities for continuous professional development for APS
officials through memberships with professional organisations, webinars and workshops led
by experts in the procurement and contract management field and sharing knowledge and
lessons through a community of practice.
Finance is working with Australian Government Consulting (AGC) to ensure greater
distribution and awareness of the ‘Consulting Playbook’ (guidance prepared by AGC to
support the APS to get better value for money when engaging external consultants).
5
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that the transfer of knowledge from the consultant to the
Australian Public Service be factored into the design, management and evaluation of
contracts.
Response: The Government agrees the recommendation.
The Australian Government is committed to an effective and capable public service to meet
the challenges of the future. To deliver this, the Australian Government has introduced the
Australian Public Service Capability Reinvestment Fund (the Fund), established Australian
Government Consulting (AGC) and embedded knowledge transfer obligations in
Commonwealth contracts.
The Fund is an innovative approach to investing in the organisational capability of the APS
and supports the Government’s priority to build capability to address service wide challenges.
It invests in initiatives to strengthen the APS to deliver for the Australian community, now
and into the future.
Under the 2023-24 Budget measure, APS Capability Reinvestment Fund: 2023-24 projects
funded under round one, the Government has invested $10.9 million over 2 years from
2023-24 to establish AGC, to deliver high-quality in-house consulting services to the APS,
strengthen APS capability and support the APS to get better value from external consultants.
In May 2024, the Commonwealth Contracting Suite and ClauseBank were updated to include
Knowledge Transfer clauses, and guidance for entities on the Finance website to incorporate
these clauses into their contracts. These clauses can be included in contracts where the value
for money proposition relies of the retention of knowledge, skills and deliverables resulting
from the contract being captured and retained by the Commonwealth.
6
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends that the Department of Finance amend the Supplier Code of
Conduct to include a requirement for service providers to:
• act in the public interest; and
• incorporate elements from the professional standard APES 110 that align with
public sector values.
The Department of Finance should also publish guidance to illustrate examples of conduct
that are consistent with these values.
Response: The Government agrees in principle the recommendation.
The Code places a number of obligations on suppliers including, for example, expectations
that suppliers declare and manage conflicts of interest; protect sensitive, privileged, and
confidential information; conduct their business with integrity; and uphold similar values and
behaviours to those expected of public officials.
The APES 110 Principles are already captured by the Code. These are:
• Integrity;
• Objectivity;
• Professional Competence;
• Confidentiality; and
• Professional Behaviour
In particular, Expectation 1.4 – Emulate the Australian Public Service (APS) Values, states:
“When a supplier is undertaking work on behalf of the Commonwealth, they must uphold
similar values and behaviours to those expected of public officials in the APS Values. This is
always important, but particularly relevant where a supplier interacts with, or provides
services to, the Australian Public”.
7
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends that the Department of Finance review its guidance on
conflicts of interest and provide a clear and consistent definition of what constitutes a
conflict of interest, a conflict-of-interest breach, and expectations around the management
of conflicts of interest. The guidance should also emphasise that active management of
conflicts of interest must be an element of APS project management of the contract.
Response: The Government agrees the recommendation.
As part of the Government’s initial response to the PwC breach of confidentiality, the
Treasurer announced a range of measures in August 2023, including that Finance will lead a
review, with the support of an inter-agency reference group, to examine confidentiality and
conflicts of interest (COI) arrangements across the Commonwealth. The review concluded in
December 2024.
The aim of the review was to deliver outputs that would support entities in actively managing
COI internal and external to the APS in a consistent manner to ensure that negative
consequences of engaging with COI are not realised.
To support this outcome the review delivered:
• a unified approach to managing COI
• a common COI definition and risk-based principles
• key principles underpinning confidentiality and guidance on developing legally
binding and enforceable confidentiality clauses, and
• a Resource Management Guide to support the definition and principles, and the active
management of COI.
Resource Management Guide 208 (RMG 208) provides guidance to Commonwealth entities
on actively managing confidentiality and COI when engaging external suppliers. It
emphasizes proactive due diligence at the outset of engagements to identify and prevent
conflicts. Where actual or perceived conflicts arise, entities must implement a documented
management plan endorsed by a delegate, review it regularly, and maintain compliance
throughout the engagement. RMG 208 works alongside the Commonwealth Supplier Code of
Conduct, which requires suppliers to declare and manage conflicts, and contractual clauses
such as the Notice of Significant Events, ensuring a robust framework for preventing,
detecting, and responding to breaches.
8
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommends that the Department of Finance develop a central register for
conflicts of interest breaches for use by government entities.
Response: The Government notes the recommendation.
The Australian Government is committed to ensuring high standards of supplier ethics and
integrity, and providing visibility where supplier conduct does not meet these expectations.
This includes ensuring that conflicts of interest (COI) are identified, assessed and managed,
and considering where a failure to fulfil obligations around managing COI could constitute a
breach of the Supplier Code of Conduct (the Code).
As COIs are unique to each activity, making the requirement to identify, assess and manage
them is best managed by the responsible agency. However, awareness of interests that could
give rise to a conflict of interest is an area that Finance is looking at. The review of
confidentiality and COI arrangements that concluded in December 2024 (refer to response to
Recommendation 6) examined options to support an appropriate level of transparency and
consistency in the management of conflicts of interest.
The review concluded that existing mechanisms, such as the Code, and the Notice of
Significant Events Clause, together with Resource Management Guide 208 (RMG 208)
already achieve the intended purpose of such a register.
RMG 208 requires Commonwealth officials to conduct thorough due diligence on suppliers
at the start of any external engagement to prevent COI. It states that if an actual or perceived
conflict arises, entities must implement a documented management plan endorsed by the
delegate, review it regularly, and ensure compliance throughout the engagement to actively
manage COI. This process helps ensure that conflicts do not materialise.
In parallel, the Code obliges suppliers to declare and manage COI in connection with
Commonwealth contracts. Breaching these obligations constitutes a breach of the Code,
which may lead to remedial action or termination under contractual provisions. Such a breach
also triggers the Notice of Significant Events Clause, requiring suppliers to promptly notify
the Commonwealth. This notification enables the Commonwealth to mitigate risks that could
compromise service delivery or damage its reputation.
Together, these measures provide a proactive framework to prevent, detect, and respond to
COI without the need for a separate central register.
9
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends that the Department of Finance improve the useability of
AusTender by including:
• detailed, consistent and meaningful descriptions of contracts;
• clarity on the nature of contract extensions including links to the original contract
notification; and
• information on any concerns raised in relation to the service provider.
Response: The Government agrees in principle the recommendation.
The Australian Government is committed to the transparency of Commonwealth
procurements and contracts and improving access to and quality of procurement data.
On 1 July 2024, Finance implemented reporting changes to increase the transparency of
contracts published on AusTender, including a new AusTender reporting specification, which
required entities, by 1 July 2025, to:
• provide standardised amendment reporting reasons that better reflect the contract
amendment or extension undertaken
• report the value reduction where a contract has been descoped and results in a value
reduction
• report the number and maximum extension options available under the contract, and
• report the number of suppliers that were invited where a contract has been awarded
from a standing offer notice/panel arrangement or a limited tender process.
To support these changes, Finance published an update to Resource Management Guide -
Procurement Publishing and Reporting Obligations (RMG 423), on 4 July 2024 which
provides guidance for entities on their quality assurance obligations.
Finance undertakes quality assurance of contract data published on AusTender by checking
data and alerting entities of anomalies, and regularly reminding entities of their reporting
obligations.
Officials are required to undertake due diligence activities throughout the procurement
lifecycle to identify and reduce risks and support assurance and accountability. This includes
the verification and assurance of tenderers’ claims and the verification of the delivery of
goods and services during contract management. Commonwealth contracts generally contain
provisions, including in relation to a supplier’s performance and dispute resolution
procedures, that allow the Commonwealth to identify and address any concerns that may
arise throughout the delivery of the contract.
The retention and publication on AusTender of information on concerns raised in relation to
the service provider would raise significant privacy and procedural fairness issues. The
Government considers that existing mechanisms appropriately support officials to identify
and address concerns relating to service providers.
10
Recommendation 9
The Committee recommends that the government commissions the Australian Law
Reform Commission, or other appropriate body, to undertake a review of the legislative
frameworks and structures of partnerships in Australia with particular focus on
partnerships in excess of 100 partners. The review should make recommendations to
provide for appropriate regulatory governance and oversight of structures of this scale.
Response: The Government notes the recommendation.
Treasury undertook public consultation on the regulation of accounting, auditing and
consulting firms in Australia. One of the issues consulted on during that process was the
appropriateness of current partnership limits. The Government will give further consideration
to this matter as part of a Treasury review to ensure fulsome consideration of interacting
issues.
11
Recommendation 10
The Committee recommends that the Australian government:
• require those organisations that operate professional standards as self-regulatory
regimes, to report annually on the operation of those standards to the Joint
Standing Committee on Corporations and Financial Services; and
• require these same organisations to appear before that Committee to provide
oversight on the operation of the relevant standard.
The Committee recognises that the Commonwealth government may need to work with
state and territory governments to implement this recommendation.
Response: The Government notes the recommendation.
Treasury consulted on the effectiveness of the self-regulatory framework as part of its public
consultation on the regulation of accounting, auditing and consulting firms in Australia. The
Government will further consider this issue as part of a Treasury review to ensure fulsome
consideration of interacting issues.
12
Recommendation 11
The Committee recommends that the Parliament legislate to establish a Joint Standing
Committee to review and approve consultancy and services contracts with provisions and
thresholds similar to those in the Public Works Act 1969 but appropriately adjusted to suit
the requirements of providing oversight for this significant element of government
spending.
Response: The Government does not agree the recommendation.
The proposed arrangement to review and approve contracts has the potential to create legal
risk and conflict with Australia’s international obligations. In accordance with those
obligations, for procurements over the relevant threshold, paragraph 10.35 of the CPRs
requires that, “unless the relevant entity determines it is not in the public interest to award a
contract, it must award a contract to the tenderer that the relevant entity has determined:
• satisfies the condition for participation;
• is fully capable of undertaking the contract; and
• will provide the best value for money, in accordance with the essential requirements and
evaluation criteria specified in the approach to market and request documentation.”
A decision of a parliamentary committee which has the ability to approve a contract implies
that it has the ability to prevent the awarding of a contract. This would likely be inconsistent
with the Australian Government’s international obligations which outline that a procuring
entity (as listed in the relevant international agreement) must award a contract to the supplier
the entity has determined meets the criteria and submitted the most advantageous tender. Any
contravention of this, including a Committee intervening or overruling the decision of the
procuring entity (as per CPR paragraph 10.35), risks suppliers taking action against the
Australian Government under the Government Procurement (Judicial Review) Act 2018, and
could result in the payment of compensation to supplier/s.
Implementation of this arrangement would also establish a significant tension and conflict
between the role of the Parliament and the role of accountable authorities, as established in
the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 (PGPA Act), to manage
expenditure of public resources in an efficient, effective, economical and ethical manner.
The Government maintains a strong accountability and transparency framework which
includes obligations on officials to report consultancy and service contracts.
• Resource Management Guide - Procurement Publishing and Reporting Obligations
(RMG 423) sets out the publishing and reporting requirements for relevant entities
under the Commonwealth Procurement Framework and other government policies.
This includes obligations to identify consultancy contracts on AusTender.
• Resource Management Guide - Annual reports for non-corporate Commonwealth
entities (RMG 135) sets out the annual reporting obligations for non-corporate
Commonwealth entities, including information on consultancy contract expenditure.
Finance finalised specific training for SES delegates in November 2024. This training focuses
on SES responsibilities and obligations under the under the Commonwealth Procurement
Rules and the PGPA Act to promote the proper use and management of the public resources
for which they are responsible. Training assists SES delegates to consider the most
13
appropriate financial arrangement to achieve the Government's policy outcomes, including
the appropriate use of consultant arrangements. To date, Finance has delivered 31 sessions to
509 attendees with a further seven sessions scheduled up to March 2026.
It is essential that any improvement in oversight should not inadvertently call into question
legitimate executive decision-making, undermine or increase the complexity of the
procurement framework, delay the delivery of government objectives nor create avenues for
complaints or compensation claims.
Finance notes Recommendation 1 of the Eighty Seventh Annual Report by the Parliamentary
Committee on Public Works (tabled 24 March 2024) proposes a thorough review of the
Public Works Committee Act 1969, with a view to repealing and replacing the legislation.
14
Recommendation 12
The Committee recommends that the Senate pass the following order: That:
• there be laid on the table, by the Minster for Finance, biannual statements on
expenditure on consultancy contracts which provide for consideration to the value
of $2 million or more, by all Australian Public Service departments and agencies;
• the statements are due not later than the tenth day after the end of the preceding
six-month period commencing 1 January and 1 July;
• each report is to include, in relation to each contract, details of the:
▪ dollar value;
▪ subject matter;
▪ duration;
▪ contracting government agency;
▪ firm or entity providing the work;
▪ an explanation of what the contract is expected to deliver/purpose of the
contract;
▪ any changes or extensions; and
▪ any matters of probity or conflict of interest that have arisen in the conduct
of the work.
• each report is to include the total amount of all current consultancy contracts in
each agency or department.
The order is of continuing effect until the Senate Finance and Public Administration
References Committee has reported to the Senate that Recommendation 8 and 11 of this
report have been implemented.
Response: The Government agrees in part with this recommendation.
On 3 July 2024 the Senate approved an amended version of this recommendation supported
by the Government, Hansard - Senate 3/07/2024 Parliament of Australia (aph.gov.au).
15
Australian Government response to the
recommendations made by the Australian Greens
Recommendation 1
The Australian Greens recommend the Australian Government ensure that:
• PwC (or any of its related entities) should not be permitted to tender for
government work until all matters arising from current investigations (eg by the
Tax Practitioners Board (TPB), the Australian Federal Police (AFP), the
Australian Taxation Office (ATO) and the National Anti-Corruption Commission
(NACC) are completed, including investigation of recently surfaced matters
related to preparation of responses to Request for Information notices for PwC
clients and involvement in Foreign Investment Review Board approval processes.
• further, PwC should not be permitted to contract for government work until it has
provided the Linklaters report to the Australian Senate.
• in view of its misdemeanours in the misuse of confidential information, PwC
should be excluded from government contracting for 5 years.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
Recommendation 2
The Australian Greens recommend that:
• in view of the investigations underway extending back to 2012, any consulting
entity led by Mr Luke Sayers should be excluded from Australian Government
contracting until those investigations are concluded and any of their implications
in relation to Mr Sayers considered and concluded.
• a ban from Australian Government contracts of at least 5 years should apply to
any consulting entity led by its previous CEO, Mr Luke Sayers, who held
leadership in the years of PwC's confidentiality misdemeanours.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
Recommendation 3
The Australian Greens recommend that:
• that the Australian Government requires departments and agencies to reduce
spending on external consulting services by 15 per cent each year for five years
and offset that decline with growth in public sector capacity.
• that employment numbers in the Australian Public Service (APS) grow at least in
line with population growth in Australia.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
16
Recommendation 4
The Australian Greens recommend that the Australian Government commit to lifting APS
wages at least in line with inflation and improve other employment conditions at least in
line with community standards.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
Recommendation 5
The Australian Greens recommend that the Australian Government require:
• the Department of Finance to create a Contract Probity Office to exercise central
oversight over government procurement, complementing devolved management of
procurement.
• that the Contract Probity Office have the power to follow up when contracting
failures occur in a department or agency and impose penalties and take regulatory
action, modelled on Western Australia's debarment and suspension regime which
enables the cancellation of existing contracts.
• that the Commonwealth Procurement Rules be amended to ensure they apply to all
corporate Commonwealth entities.
• that either the Joint Committee on Public Accounts and Audit or the Australian
National Audit Office conduct an annual review of consulting services in
Commonwealth departments and agencies, highlighting systemic and significant
issues or failures.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
Recommendation 6
The Australian Greens recommend that the Australian Government:
• require entities with government contracts to publish their client lists.
• require consultants undertaking public sector work to avoid any conflict of
interest, actual or perceived, and disclose details of any material personal interest
in connection with their contract.
• instate stronger investigative and enforcement mechanisms to ensure actual and
perceived conflicts of interest are disclosed, investigated, penalised, and
appropriately managed.
• ensure that undeclared conflicts of interest should attract a 5-year ban on public
sector work.
• ensure that any consulting firm under investigation by a regulatory body must
advise the government and cannot tender for new work until it is cleared.
• create a register of banned firms and individuals.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government refers to its response to the Committee’s Recommendations 6
and 7.
17
Recommendation 7
The Australian Greens recommend that the Australian Government ensure more effective
management of government contracts, with effective costing, control, milestone
management and active management of 'land-and-expand' and power and relationship
mapping.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
Recommendation 8
The Australian Greens recommend that the Australian Government require publication on
AusTender the size and reasons for any amendments or variations to a contract.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government refers to its response to the Committee’s Recommendation 8
with respect to recently implemented reporting changes to increase the transparency of
contracts published on AusTender.
Recommendation 9
The Australian Greens recommend that AusTender be improved by:
• expanding AusTender disclosure requirements about the nature of work and its
purpose.
• requiring publication on AusTender for the reasons for contract termination.
• improving the usability of the AusTender website.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government refers to its response to the Committee’s Recommendation 8
with respect to recently implemented reporting changes to increase the transparency of
contracts published on AusTender.
Recommendation 10
The Australian Greens recommend:
• that the Senate agree to an order of continuous effect to require the production of
consultant reports, including draft versions that were never finalised, at the
completion of each significant contract to ensure greater value for money and
transparency.
• that the Senate conduct an annual Estimates process in relation to major consulting
contracts, where consultancy firms can be required to appear.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
18
Recommendation 11
The Australian Greens recommend that any entities tendering or contracting to the
Australian Government be banned from making political donations (direct, indirect,
in-kind, pro-bono or otherwise) in the 12 months before applying for contracts, while an
application is being considered, or 12 months after contract obligations have been
completed.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
Recommendation 12
The Australian Greens recommend that the Australian Government stop the revolving
door by enforcing a 1-year cooling-off period for:
• partners in partnerships and/or executives in consulting and other entities that have
held a significant contract with government in the last 12 months from
commencing in the public service.
• APS Senior Executives commencing with an entity that has contracted to
government in the last 12 months in a related form of business.
• senior staff in a Minister's office from commencing with an entity that has
contracted to government in the last 12 months.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
Recommendation 13
The Australian Greens Recommend that the Australian Government require that:
• the cooling off period for former Ministers and senior staff in the Code of Conduct
for Ministers is extended from 18 months to 5 years, with strong enforcement.
• the Australian Public Service Commission to monitor and regularly publish data
on the movement of personnel to and from the Australian Public Service and the
largest 20 contractors to government.
• there is a review of current arrangements, to ensure that consultants with access to
Government departments, including Defence, have appropriate passes and access
which do not compromise security and enable land-and-expand.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
19
Recommendation 14
The Australian Greens recommend that the Australian Government:
• amend the Corporations Act 2001 to lower the maximum number of partners for
accountants to 100.
• ensure that the states and territories refer their remaining power to regulate large
partnerships to the Commonwealth.
• legislate transparency and reporting requirements for large partnerships as apply to
corporations under the Corporations Act.
• ban the use of Everett Assignments and that the Government tax the distributions
from trusts at the company tax rate of 30 per cent.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
Recommendation 15
The Australian Greens recommend that any firm providing audit services in Australia be
prevented from providing non-audit services, including when engaging in business with
the Australian Government.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
Recommendation 16
The Australian Greens recommend that the Australian Government:
• acknowledge that voluntarist and self-regulation has failed in the consulting sector
and that enforceable standards are required, including powers of investigation and
penalties.
• establish an Independent Regulator for the consulting industry, with an
enforceable professional code of conduct, national standards, investigation powers
and penalties for breaches.
• consider giving responsibility for regulating professional services in one
independent institution, with investigative and enforcement powers.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
20
Recommendation 17
The Australian Greens recommend that the Australian Government:
• require that all consultancy and accounting firms must have the same
whistleblower obligations as corporations under the Corporations Act.
• establish a National Whistleblower Commission.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
Recommendation 18
The Australian Greens recommend that the use and misuse of legal professional privilege
to combat legitimate investigations of consultancy 103 malpractice should be reviewed
and stricter rules and specific protocols be developed to limit misuse.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
Recommendation 19
The Australian Greens recommend that greater transparency of confidential tax
settlements be provided, and clear protocols be established for their use.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
Recommendation 20
The Australian Greens recommend, to ensure robust regulation that is free of actual or
perceived conflicts of interest or possible capture:
• that the Australian Government ban partners and former partners of consulting
firms and other entities who are in receipt of income from those partnerships or
entities, from membership of regulatory and standards setting boards for that
industry.
• that the ban extend to anyone who has within the last 6 months received a material
benefit, from such an entity;
• and, further, is a former executive officer of a company that is currently regulated
by that entity if any of the following apply: the individual is receiving regular and
ongoing benefits, or has within the last 6 months received a material benefit, from
a company regulated by that entity; or if the individual holds shares in the
company.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
21
Recommendation 21
The Australian Greens recommend that the Australian Government ensure robust
investigation, and that regulators and investigators be protected from insecurity, political
pressure or other forms of threat or constraint while conducting investigations.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
Recommendation 22
The Australian Greens recommend that the Senate consider options available to it in
relation to KPMG’s misleading and incorrect evidence to the inquiry.
Response: This recommendation is for the Senate to respond to.
22
