Australian Government response to the Parliamentary
Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services
report:
Ethics and Professional Accountability: Structural
Challenges in the Audit, Assurance and Consultancy
Industry
February 2026
Australian Government response to the Parliamentary Joint Committee on
Corporations and Financial Services report: Ethics and Professional Accountability:
Structural Challenges in the Audit, Assurance and Consultancy Industry
Government engagement with consultancy firms
The Government notes Recommendations 1, 29, 30, 31 and 34.
Government Response
Ethical Suppliers
The Government expects its suppliers to conduct themselves with high standards of ethics such that
they consistently act with integrity and accountability. The Australian Government has undertaken a
range of actions to strengthen supplier integrity and contract transparency.
The Australian Government has developed the Commonwealth Supplier Code of Conduct (Code)
as a key measure to strengthen supplier behaviour. The Code sets out the Government’s expectation
for suppliers to uphold similar values and behaviours to those expected of public officials in the
APS Values. The Code notes that the standards and values expected of public servants are not
expressed in terms of public interest.
The Code, which came into effect on 1 July 2024, places obligations on suppliers and their
subcontractors to act ethically while under contract with the Commonwealth. In particular,
Expectation 1.4 – Emulate the Australian Public Service (APS) Values, states that: “When a
supplier is undertaking work on behalf of the Commonwealth, they must uphold similar values and
behaviours to those expected of public officials in the APS Values. This is always important, but
particularly relevant where a supplier interacts with, or provides services to, the Australian
Public”.
The Commonwealth Contracting Suite and ClauseBank include standard clauses for inclusion in
Commonwealth contracts, placing contractual obligations on suppliers to meet the expectations set
out by the Code. Failure to adhere to the Code may result in remedial action and/or termination in
accordance with contractual provisions. Guidance for Commonwealth entities is available on the
Department of Finance (Finance) website to assist officials in managing these contractual
obligations.
Additionally, the Contract Management Guide, updated in August 2025, reinforces the importance
of managing the ethical conduct of suppliers, and ensures officials responsible for managing
Commonwealth contracts are aware of the obligations of all parties under the Code.
In relation to PricewaterhouseCoopers Australia (PwC Australia), in mid-2025, Finance completed
its review of the ethical soundness of PwC Australia. The final report is available on the Finance
website.1
Encouraging SMEs
In October 2025, the Government announced amendments to the Commonwealth Procurement
Rules to require that Australian suppliers were first approached for certain procurements, including
1 https://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/2025-08/examination-of-pwc-australias-ethical-soundness.pdf
2
that Small and Medim Enterprises were first approached for any procurement below $125,000 from
the Management Advisory Services Panel, People Panel, or any standing offer managed by the
Digital Transformation Agency.
3
Government consultation on the regulation of accounting, auditing and consulting firms in
Australia
The Government notes Recommendations 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19,
21, 25, 26, 27, 32, 33, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39 and 40.
Government Response
The Government has taken decisive action to strengthen the regulation of accounting, auditing and
consulting firms in Australia. This includes legislative changes:
• to strengthen the powers of the Tax Practitioners Board (TPB) to improve regulation and
transparency within the tax profession in the Treasury Laws Amendment (2023 Measures
No. 1) Act 2023 (Cth)
• to enhance obligations for tax practitioners through the Tax Agent Services (Code of
Professional Conduct) Determination 2024
• through the Treasury Laws Amendment (Tax Accountability and Fairness) Act 2024 (Cth)
to:
o amend the promoter penalty laws to strengthen the Australian Taxation Office’s
(ATO) enforcement powers and provide a broader range of tools to regulators to
identify and discipline those who break the law
o extend whistleblower protections to eligible whistleblowers who make disclosures
to the TPB or the ATO, where the whistleblower considers that the information
may assist the TPB in performing its functions or duties.
The Treasury Laws Amendment (Tax Accountability and Fairness) Act 2024 (Cth) broadened the
ATO’s enforcement powers by:
• increasing the time the ATO has to bring an application for civil penalty proceedings (to
6 years)
• raising the maximum penalty applicable for firms which promote tax exploitation schemes
from $7.8 million to over $780 million
• broadening the scope of key definitions in the law to extend the scope of the promoter
penalty laws to all ATO rulings, ensuring that the laws prohibit the promotion of a scheme
on the basis of a false assertion that it has ATO endorsement.
Treasury coordinated a whole-of-government response to systemic issues in the regulatory and tax
environment. This work considered options to strengthen regulatory frameworks, improve
transparency and accountability, as well as incentivise good behaviour and deal with misconduct.
To date, the Government has consulted on:
• a review of the sanctions regime that the TPB administers, released on 10 December 2023
4
• a review of the ATO and the TPB’s respective investigation and information gathering
powers, released on 3 May 2024
• a review of the tax practitioner registration requirements, released on 17 July 2024
• a review of the penalty regime that applies to promoters of tax exploitation schemes,
released on 4 October 2024
• a review of the secrecy provisions that restrict information sharing by government tax
regulators, released on 20 December 2024
• a joint review with the Attorney-General’s Department of the use of legal professional
privilege in Commonwealth investigations, released on 23 December 2024
• the regulation of accounting, auditing and consulting firms in Australia in May 2024, which
considered the issues outlined in these recommendations, including:
o the governance and regulation of partnerships, and audit and multidisciplinary
firms
o the provision of non-audit services and potential conflicts of interest
o the role and enforcement powers of key regulators
o transparency, public information and reporting issues
o competition and resilience of the audit sector
o protections available to whistleblowers.
The Government will continue to consider these matters as part of ongoing policy work. Treasury
will also consult publicly on whether the tax and corporate whistleblowing frameworks are working
as intended as part of its statutory review of those frameworks.
5
Government consultation on the merging of the Australian Accounting Standards Board, the
Auditing and Assurance Standards Board and the Financial Reporting Council
The Government notes Recommendations 20, 22, 23, 24 and 28.
Government Response
In October 2025, the Government released for consultation exposure draft legislation to combine
the Australian Accounting Standards Board, the Auditing and Assurance Standards Board and the
Financial Reporting Council into a single body.
There are a number of recommendations from the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations
and Financial Services’ report that the exposure draft legislation responded to:
• Treasury will no longer provide a Secretariat function to the standard setting body once it is
established.
• The exposure draft legislation would require the Minister, in making appointments to the
new combined body’s Governing Council, to have regard to the principle that the
Governing Council as a whole, and as an entity that engages in collective decision-making,
should contain an appropriate level of representation of persons who are, and are seen to
be, independent from Australian auditors. This balanced approach ensures that the new
standard setting body can continue to access appropriate expert representation as
appropriate at the Governing Council level without enabling strategic decision-making to
be controlled or overly influenced by representatives from a particular industry or with a
particular financial incentive.
• The exposure draft legislation would supplement the disclosure of interests requirements
applying to statutory officeholders under the Public Governance, Performance and
Accountability Act 2013 by requiring members to disclose interests as soon as practicable
after they become known, to strengthen the Governing Council’s ongoing oversight and
management of conflicts of interest.
• The exposure draft legislation would require the Chair of the Governing Council to
determine a code of conduct for the new body that applies to members of the Governing
Council and standard setting boards (among others).
• The exposure draft legislation would empower the Minister, by legislative instrument, to
specify additional functions to be performed by the new body. This will add flexibility to
the new institutional arrangements and better position the body to respond to future
standard setting needs.
6
