
3546 SENATE Monday, 9 September 2024
didn't see a habitat tree—and slated the entire chunk of forest, about four different compartments, for wholesale
logging. Locals cannot believe it.
They also can't believe it because it's the same forest that their local council has identified for the extraordinary,
70-kilometre Mogo mountain bike trail network. All the locals are excited about the jobs that could be in the forests
through having this amazing mountain bike network on some of the converted forestry roads and tracks. They're
excited about the investment in ecotourism and about the protection of their forest. Yet, right smack bang in the
middle of the proposed new Mogo mountain bike trail network, the New South Wales government, under Labor,
wants to destroy the forest. Locals just cannot believe the environmental and economic vandalism in their local area.
They also note that these mature forests were the thing that stopped the big fires. The mature forests, with their
moist understorey, were what stopped the big fires and will stop the next big bushfire. If these forests get logged—
and I can tell you now that forest campaigners like Colleen, Joslyn and others are going to be in there doing what
they can to protect these forests and stop them being logged—we know what will happen. The whole forest will dry
out. It will be replaced with spindly saplings, and it will be ripe and primed for the next big fire, which will tear
through those forests and destroy homes, like we've seen time after time with recently logged forests. The locals
know that for their own safety, for the planet's safety, protecting these forests is absolutely essential.
So I join with my colleagues to say to Labor: 'Grow a backbone. You know it's right to protect native forests
from logging. You know that it's essential for climate. You know it's essential for our native species. You know it's
essential for keeping communities safe from the next big bloody fire that's coming.' Surely even Labor could realise
that it's wrong to log forests that are chock-a-block full of endangered greater gliders. Surely even Labor can see
that that's wrong. And if you see it's wrong, do something about it: join with the Greens, join with the progressive
majority in this chamber and finally end native forest logging in this country.
Senator CHISHOLM (Queensland—Assistant Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Assistant
Minister for Education, Assistant Minister for Regional Development and Deputy Manager of Government Business
in the Senate) (11:50): The Illegal Logging Prohibition Amendment (Strengthening Measures to Prevent Illegal
Timber Trade) Bill 2024 will modernise and strengthen Australia's illegal logging laws to better protect the
Australian market from illegally harvested timber and support a legal and sustainable timber trade. It will increase
regulatory efficiency and effectiveness by strengthening monitoring, investigation and enforcement powers,
including through new timber testing powers and the use of injunctions and enforceable undertakings. It will also
enable the provision of key due diligence information up-front, thereby enhancing our ability to use data to identify
high-risk timber products and enable appropriate enforcement action to be taken.
Changes proposed by the bill have been informed by a comprehensive public consultation process that sought
broad support from industry and non-government organisations for the improvements and by the development of a
regulation impact statement published in 2023. These changes complement the work the Australian government is
doing through the 2022 election commitment to invest $4.4 million to improve timber identification testing and
illegal logging traceability.
The bill has been subject to a Rural and Regional Affairs and Transport Legislation Committee inquiry, and I
thank everyone who participated in the inquiry as well as the committee for its consideration of the bill. The
committee released its report on 20 June 2024, and I will take this opportunity to provide the government response
to the report. The report recommended that the bill be passed, and the government welcomes and agrees with this
recommendation. The coalition senators' dissenting report recommended that the passage of the bill be deferred
until after the finalisation of the rules to be made under the proposed act. The government notes this recommendation
but does not agree with it. The rules cannot be finalised until the bill passes the parliament and the rule-making
power becomes operative. However, the government is ensuring that the regulated community and other
stakeholders have an opportunity to comment on the draft rules before they are finalised. On 19 August this year an
exposure draft of the rules was released for public consultation, and the department has held a public webinar to
explain key changes. They have received valuable feedback from stakeholders to date.
In relation to the other matters raised in the dissenting report, I note that the strict liability offences and publication
powers are increasingly common across Australian legislation, including environmental legislation, as they broaden
regulatory options. These are appropriately framed, and I thank the committee for recognising the intentions to
utilise these appropriately and sensitively. As stated in the explanatory memorandum to the bill, the proposed new
publication powers are intended to be used only when noncompliance is repeated or very serious and when it is
considered in the public interest to do so. Such instances may be where a person has been convicted of an offence
on several occasions or has repeatedly failed to comply with due diligence requirements without undertaking further
checks or adjusting practices. It is not intended that publication would occur for minor instances of noncompliance
where publication would not be in the public interest or where noncompliance can be otherwise addressed.
CHAMBER
Monday, 9 September 2024 SENATE 3547
As for concerns raised over the new power to enable testing of timber and regulated timber products, the bill does
not impose any requirements on importers or processors to test timber themselves and bear the associated costs. The
new timber testing power would be available to Commonwealth officers to utilise under compliance activities and
is strictly limited to being exercised only when the timber or regulated timber product is subject to biosecurity
control or customs control.
The opposition has previously raised a proposal to exclude domestic timber processors from the application of
the laws. I note that it is appropriate to maintain the current situation whereby the illegal logging prohibition
legislation applies to both timber importers and processors of raw logs. This ensures that the regulation of illegally
logged timber is consistent with Australia's trade law obligations. The opposition has also previously questioned the
need to require notices of intention to import a regulated timber product. Changing the operation of key provisions
would undermine the intention of the new notice requirement, which is to obtain and use information to better target
compliance powers.
Finally, the government notes the committee's comments on the importance of continued stakeholder
consultation. As demonstrated by the current consultation process, the government recognises this and is fully
committed to ongoing engagement with regulated entities.
Recommendations in the RRAT report from the Australian Greens have also been reflected in proposed
amendments tabled, which the government notes but does not agree to.
In recommendation 1, corresponding to the amendment on sheet 2643, the Australian Greens recommended that
section 18B of the bill be amended to require that import notices include, at a minimum, information on the species
and countries of harvest of imported timber. The government does not agree to this recommendation. The
government's position is that the timber species and country of harvest would be more appropriately prescribed in
the rules, along with other requirements under section 18B of the bill as drafted, and as noted in the explanatory
memorandum. It is intended that these matters would be prescribed by the rules once an IT system that would
support receiving notices is operational and the regulated community has been consulted.
In recommendation 2, corresponding to the amendments on sheet 2626, the Australian Greens recommended that
section 7 of the act be amended to cover further laws that may impact supply chain illegality. The government does
not agree with this recommendation because the due diligence requirements already require importers of regulated
timber products and processors of raw logs to consider any other information the importer or processor knows
indicating illegal logging risk.
In recommendation 3, corresponding to the amendment on sheet 2645, the Australia Greens recommended that
the bill be amended to require regular public reporting of the extent of illegal logging in Australia and of the action
taken under the act. The government does not support this recommendation, as the act does not directly regulate the
act of harvesting timber within Australia. These matters are regulated by state and territory legislation, the reporting
of which is not the responsibility of the Commonwealth.
In recommendation 4, corresponding to the amendments on sheet 2646, the Australian Greens recommended that
the bill be amended so that the rules may provide that the due diligence obligations can be satisfied by compliance
with specific domestic or foreign laws, rules or operational processes as part of the due diligence applications. The
government does not agree with this recommendation as the act already provides for this. Consequently the
amendments do not add anything and may have unintended consequences for the interpretation of the provisions.
In recommendation 5, corresponding to the amendments on sheet 2647, the Australian Greens recommended that
the Senate pass the Ending Native Forest Logging Bill. The government does not agree to this recommendation.
The Ending Native Forest Logging Bill has no relevance to, or connection with, this bill.
In recommendation 6, the Australian Greens recommended that the bill be passed by the Senate with amendments
in line with the above recommendations. For the reasons already given, the government does not agree to this
recommendation, nor does the government agree to further amendments proposed by the Australian Greens.
Regarding amendment sheet 2665, to add prohibitions for further dealings in illegally logged timber, the
government notes that the illegal logging prohibition legislation already prohibits illegally logged timber from
entering the Australian market by way of importation and the processing of raw logs within Australia. This was
informed by extensive work in developing the current illegal logging prohibition legislation. There's no good reason
to deviate from this.
Regarding the proposed amendment on sheet 2664, that 'interested persons' be able to apply for injunctions
relating to conduct or proposed conduct, the government does not agree to this amendment. Injunctions are available
under the Regulatory Powers Act for those who administer and enforce the legislation to restrain contraventions of
the legislation or to compel compliance with the legislation. It would not be appropriate or practical to extend these
powers to other 'interested persons'.
CHAMBER
3548 SENATE Monday, 9 September 2024
Regarding the proposed amendment on sheet 2645, that an independent review of the operation of the act be
conducted within five years and during each subsequent five-year period, the government does not agree to this
recommendation. The government notes that it has already agreed to amendments moved in the House of
Representatives to conduct an independent review of the act within five years.
The Australian government remains committed to combating illegal logging and associated trade and its global
environmental, social and economic impacts. Illegal logging remains the greatest transborder environmental crime
globally and undercuts the prices our domestic forest industries can receive for sustainably produced timber
products.
I commend this bill, which will optimise Australia's illegal logging laws to protect our market from illegally
harvested timber and illegally logged raw logs, to the Senate.
I also table an addendum to the revised explanatory memorandum relating to the Illegal Logging Prohibition
Amendment (Strengthening Measures to Prevent Illegal Timber Trade) Bill 2024. The addendum responds to
matters raised by the scrutiny of bills committee.
The DEPUTY PRESIDENT: The question before the Senate is that the second reading amendment as moved
by Senator McKim be agreed to.
The Senate divided. [12:04]
(The Deputy President—Senator McLachlan)
Ayes ...................... 12
Noes ...................... 28
Majority ................. 16
AYES
Allman-Payne, P. J. Cox, D. Faruqi, M.
Hanson-Young, S. C. Hodgins-May, S. McKim, N. J. (Teller)
Pocock, B. Pocock, D. W. Shoebridge, D.
Steele-John, J. A. Waters, L. J. Whish-Wilson, P. S.
NOES
Ayres, T. Brown, C. L. Chisholm, A.
Ciccone, R. Colbeck, R. M. Darmanin, L.
Duniam, J. R. Farrell, D. E. Ghosh, V.
Green, N. L. Grogan, K. Lambie, J.
McCarthy, M. McLachlan, A. L. O'Neill, D. M.
O'Sullivan, M. A. (Teller) Polley, H. Pratt, L. C.
Roberts, M. I. Scarr, P. M. Sheldon, A. V.
Smith, M. F. Sterle, G. Stewart, J. N. A.
Tyrrell, T. M. Urquhart, A. E. Walsh, J. C.
Watt, M. P.
Question negatived.
Senator DAVID POCOCK (Australian Capital Territory) (12:07): I move:
At the end of the motion, add ", but the Senate:
(a) notes that:
(i) native forest logging operates at a loss in Australia and is heavily subsidised by Australian governments,
(ii) native forest logging is driving at least 48 Australian native wildlife/fauna species, and many more native flora
species, towards extinction, including the swift parrot, koala and greater glider,
(iii) native forest logging has operated under an exemption from Australia's environment law for 25 years, which has
accelerated the loss of forest-dwelling species and caused ecosystem decline, with some forest ecosystems now at risk of
collapse,
(iv) in the last 25 years of native forest logging in Australia, more than one in four forest-dependent threatened fauna
species have officially moved closer to extinction, 15 previously common forest-dependent fauna have been added to the
CHAMBER
Monday, 9 September 2024 SENATE 3559
(1) The Minister must cause an independent review to be conducted of the operation of this Act:
(a) during the 5-year period starting on the commencement of the Illegal Logging Prohibition Amendment
(Strengthening Measures to Prevent Illegal Timber Trade) Act 2024; and
(b) during each subsequent 5-year period.
(1A) Without limiting subsection (1), a review under subsection (1) must examine and report on:
(a) the extent of illegal logging in Australia; and
(b) action taken under the Act to respond to illegal logging in Australia.
Reporting
Question negatived.
The CHAIR: I order that it be recorded that the Greens voted for that amendment.
Bill agreed to.
Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.
Third Reading
Senator CHISHOLM (Queensland—Assistant Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry, Assistant
Minister for Education, Assistant Minister for Regional Development and Deputy Manager of Government Business
in the Senate) (13:06): I move:
That this bill be now read a third time.
Question agreed to.
Bill read a third time.
Australian Human Rights Commission Amendment (Costs Protection) Bill 2023
Second Reading
Consideration resumed of the motion:
That this bill be now read a second time.
Senator CASH (Western Australia—Deputy Leader of the Opposition in the Senate) (13:06): I rise to speak on
the Australian Human Rights Commission Amendment (Costs Protection) Bill 2023. It's appropriate to commence
my speech by reflecting on the genesis of this bill and the objectives that it should have been achieving, because
this is a bill that should be implementing recommendation 25 of the Respect@Work report.
The Respect@Work report made 55 recommendations across a range of areas, the bulk of which have now
become law with coalition support. Recommendation 25 came in the context of a discussion about barriers to
pursuing general sexual harassment claims in the courts. The discussion in the report is short but clear and dealt
with just a few key points. It's worth reflecting on those points which should have been—but are not—the guiding
principles for our discussion today.
First, the commissioner noted submissions recommending a cost protection provision in the Australian Human
Rights Commission Act which would 'provide that applicants and respondents should bear their own costs unless
an exception applies—if the court is satisfied that the party instituted proceedings vexatiously or without reasonable
cause'. Second, the report cited submissions to the effect that the general rule that costs follow the event operates as
'a disincentive to pursuing sexual harassment matters under the Sex Discrimination Act'. Third, in response to those
submissions, the commissioner acknowledged:
… the risk of a costs order acts as a disincentive to pursuing sexual harassment matters in the federal jurisdiction.
The report specifically and explicitly recommended a new provision along the lines of section 570 of the Fair
Work Act, which establishes what is known as a costs neutrality model. Critically, it noted the intended effect of
such a provision is as follows:
Such a provision should ensure costs may only be ordered against a party by the court if satisfied that the party instituted the
proceedings vexatiously or without reasonable cause, or if the court is satisfied that a party's unreasonable act or omission caused
the other party to incur costs.
The discussion in the report specifically and expressly made clear that the provision was about limiting the
circumstances in which a complainant can be made to pay costs. It recommended a provision that means that, as a
default, each party bears their own costs, except where they act vexatiously or unreasonably. In other words, it is a
protective provision.
What this bill does, though, is take a fundamentally different approach. It does not implement recommendation
25 of the Jenkins report. The bill does not implement a regime that is directed towards harassment and discrimination
claims under the Sex Discrimination Act. This bill does not implement a provision modelled on section 570 of the
CHAMBER
