Australian Government
response to the Senate
Economics Legislation
Committee Report
Treasury Laws Amendment
(Strengthening Financial Systems
and Other Measures) Bill 2025
February 2026

Contents
Introduction ......................................................................................................................1
Response to the recommendations ....................................................................................2
Coalition Senators’ Dissenting Report ...................................................................................................... 2
Recommendation 1 ............................................................................................................................. 2
Recommendation 2 ............................................................................................................................. 2
Australian Greens Additional Comments ................................................................................................. 3
Recommendation 1 ............................................................................................................................. 3
Recommendation 2 ............................................................................................................................. 5
Recommendation 3 ............................................................................................................................. 5

Australian Government response to the Senate Economics Legislation Committee Report
Introduction
The Treasury Laws Amendment (Strengthening Financial Systems and Other Measures) Bill 2025
(the Bill) proposed various amendments to Treasury portfolio legislation covering a range of matters
including financial market disclosures, taxation, charities regulation, energy market protections and
the oversight of financial regulators.
Following introduction of the Bill into Parliament on 4 September 2025, the Bill was referred to the
Senate Economics Legislation Committee (Committee) for inquiry and report. The Committee’s
report on the Bill was released on 19 November 2025.
The Committee’s report recommended that the Bill be passed. The Government’s response to
the recommendations contained in the Coalition Senators’ Dissenting Report and the
Australian Greens’ Additional Comments is set out herein. These recommendations relate
primarily to Schedules 1 and 3 of the Bill.
Schedule 1 of the Bill implements the first stage of the Government’s commitment to improve the
transparency of beneficial ownership of companies and other legal vehicles operating in Australia. It
makes a number of enhancements to the complementary substantial holding and tracing notice
regimes in the Corporations Act 2001 which govern the disclosure of interests in entities listed on
Australia’s financial markets.
These amendments include extending substantial holding disclosure requirements to fully cover
interests arising from equity derivatives, bringing foreign incorporated entities listed on Australian
markets into the scope of the regimes, streamlining and clarifying various disclosure and register
requirements and enhancing the tools available to ASIC for investigation and enforcement.
Schedule 3 of the Bill implements the Government’s announcement in the 2023–24 Budget to reduce
the frequency of the Financial Regulator Assessment Authority’s (FRAA) review cycle. The
amendments change the frequency of FRAA reviews from a biennial to a five-yearly cycle. The
Schedule also provides that there is no requirement that the FRAA have members at any particular
time, to allow for periods between reviews where there are no members.
Changing the frequency of reviews allows the FRAA to complete more comprehensive reviews which
may deliver more holistic and valuable feedback on the regulators’ performance. The change also
provides the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) and the Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority (APRA) with sufficient time to adequately consider, respond and implement
findings between reviews.
The Bill passed both Houses of Parliament on 27 November 2025 and received Royal Assent on
4 December 2025.
Introduction | 1
Australian Government response to the Senate Economics Legislation Committee Report
Response to the recommendations
Coalition Senators’ Dissenting Report
Recommendation 1
That the commencement for Schedule 1 be extended to 24 months beginning on the day this Bill
receives Royal Assent.
Australian Government Response
The Government does not support this recommendation.
The commencement period was extended from 6 months to 12 months in consideration of
stakeholder feedback received in response to exposure draft consultation.
The Government considers 12 months a reasonable time for appropriate arrangements to be made.
The Government also notes that, to the extent the amendments to disclosure requirements relating
to equity derivatives reflect existing requirements under the Takeovers Panel’s guidance, institutions
and large investors would be expected to already have a level of systems and processes in place to
ensure compliance.
Recommendation 2
That Schedule 3 of the bill be removed.
Australian Government Response
The Government does not support this recommendation.
The Government considers that Schedule 3 of the Bill, which reduces the frequency of the FRAA
reviews from a biennial to a five-yearly cycle, is appropriate. Schedule 3 better targets the regulatory
oversight of APRA and ASIC, allowing for more comprehensive and holistic reviews of financial
system regulators. It also provides sufficient time for the regulators to respond or implement the
findings of previous FRAA reviews. The change in the Schedule better balances the benefits of
consistent and more comprehensive oversight of ASIC and APRA with the cost of reviews.
2 | Response to the recommendations
Australian Government response to the Senate Economics Legislation Committee Report
Australian Greens Additional Comments
Recommendation 1
The government should introduce legislation by the end of 2026 to establish a centralised public register
of ultimate beneficial ownership for listed and unlisted entities and trusts commencing as soon as ASIC’s
business registers upgrade is complete.
Australian Government Response
The Government partially supports this recommendation.
The passage of the amendments in the Bill to enhance disclosure around interests in listed entities
delivers on the first stage of broader reforms to ensure transparency around the beneficial
ownership of companies. Listed entities are typically both widely-held and frequently traded and
therefore require a bespoke regulatory regime in order to ensure timely and fulsome disclosure is
made regarding persons and groups who own, benefit from, and have the capacity to wield influence
through, interests in these entities. This approach supports a fully informed market.
With respect to unlisted companies, the Government remains committed to implementing a public,
Commonwealth-operated register of beneficial ownership to ensure appropriate transparency
around who ultimately owns, controls or benefits from these entities.
However, the Government does not support the approach of seeking to introduce legislation by the
specific timeframe suggested.
A crucial precondition to implementation of a register for unlisted companies is the stabilisation and
uplift of the ageing technology underpinning the ASIC Companies Register to ensure it is prepared to
accept and make available beneficial ownership information.
Until relatively recently the future of the business registries has been the subject of ongoing reviews
or plans that have meant major investment and refresh needed to maintain and improve the existing
technology ecosystem has been deferred. The most recent of these was the Modernising Business
Registers (MBR) program under which the Australian Taxation Office was to build new registers and
take over ASIC’s registry function. The Government was forced to terminate the MBR Program in
August 2023 following an independent review that found it was on course to cost up to $2.8 billion.
ASIC’s business registers are critical economic infrastructure. The Government is now addressing the
historic underinvestment in the existing systems that occurred over the extended period while the
future of ASIC’s registries remained in doubt through the Registry Stabilisation and Uplift program.
The Government has committed $390.8 million since December 2023 to this program.
Response to the recommendations | 3
Australian Government response to the Senate Economics Legislation Committee Report
One of the key learnings from the Independent Review of the MBR Program is the importance of
reducing risks arising from complex operating environments and an overload in scope. Maintaining a
staged, stable and informed policy direction when delivering complex IT programs has an important
role to play. The Government intends to progress policy development work on the beneficial
ownership register on a timetable that is in step with ASIC’s current program to stabilise and uplift its
registers in order to avoid introducing new risks or disruption to the project. Any realisation of risks
or disruption of this kind would only serve, in turn, to delay the delivery of the beneficial ownership
register.
As such, detailed policy development on the beneficial ownership register is currently planned from
early 2027 and the Government will seek to progress legislation before the end of that year. This will
include adapting policy specifications outlined in previous consultations and updates to direct
implementation of a public, Commonwealth operated register.
In the meantime, a number of steps are being taken to seek to ensure, as far as practicable, the
project is aligned with future plans to incorporate beneficial ownership information into the
Companies Register:
In December 2025, Treasury released exposure draft legislation together with a background paper
seeking feedback on reforms to facilitate registry stabilisation and uplift – including the linking of
Director Identification Numbers (Director ID) to the Companies Register. This includes seeking
feedback on whether an adaptation of the Director ID regime may provide an appropriate mode for
verifying beneficial ownership information in the future.
In the 2025–26 Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook, the Government confirmed that ASIC will
commence work on updating its stabilisation and uplift technology roadmap to address the future
incorporation of beneficial ownership information into the Companies Register.
These steps will help ensure, as far as practicable, that the technology ASIC is using to deliver on
stabilisation and uplift of the registers, as well as to integrate Director ID, is best suited to also
addressing the requirements of the future beneficial ownership register.
With respect to the beneficial ownership register for trusts, the Government will also continue policy
work in 2027 on developing a beneficial ownership regime for these entities at the same time as its
work on the unlisted companies register. This will help best ensure that the two regimes for unlisted
entities are developed in a coherent way.
4 | Response to the recommendations
Australian Government response to the Senate Economics Legislation Committee Report
Recommendation 2
The bill should be amended to ensure that any person can access tracing notice registers free of charge,
not just members of the entity, academics and journalists.
Australian Government Response
The Government does not support this recommendation.
The Government believes the Bill sufficiently supports corporate transparency by providing greater
access to beneficial ownership information to interested members of the public, including providing
journalists and academics, who play a key role in initiating and encouraging public debate, with
fee-free access to tracing notice registers.
The Government does not consider it is necessary to extend access to tracing notice registers to any
person without charge. Importantly, in the context of listed entities, the substantial holding
disclosure regime means that up to date information on persons or groups with interests exceeding
5 per cent voting power in a listed entity (including interests arising from any kind of equity
derivative, as set out in the Bill) is already available to the public for free from the market operator’s
market announcements platform. Details of substantial holders from these notices are also
consolidated in listed entities’ Annual Reports under applicable listing rules.
Moreover, the fees that apply for inspection of the tracing notice register currently align with those
applicable to inspection of the company’s register of members.
Recommendation 3
The bill should be amended to allow ASIC to issue tracing notices without having to demonstrate that it
has reasonable grounds that a person has relevant interests in, or has given instructions, about
securities.
Australian Government Response
The Government does not support this recommendation.
ASIC was consulted throughout the development of these reforms and have not raised concerns that
the ‘reasonable grounds’ requirement will impede their ability to use their expanded tracing notice
power in their regulatory efforts to ensure compliance with beneficial ownership disclosure
obligations.
Response to the recommendations | 5
