Australian Government response to the
Senate Finance and Public Administration Legislation Committee report:
Data Availability and Transparency Bill 2020 [Provisions] and Data
Availability and Transparency (Consequential Amendments) Bill 2020
[Provisions] April 2021
MARCH 2023
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the opportunity to provide a response
to the Senate Finance and Public Administration Legislation Committee
(committee) report, Data Availability and Transparency Bill 2020
[Provisions] and Data Availability and Transparency (Consequential
Amendments) Bill 2020 [Provisions], tabled on 29 April 2021. The
Government acknowledges the work and recommendations by members of
the Committee.
The Government would also like to thank those who made submissions or
gave evidence to the inquiry for their contribution, which shaped the report
and recommendations.
The Committee looked into the provisions of the Data Availability and
Transparency Bill 2020 (the Bill) and the provisions of the Data Availability
and Transparency (Consequential Amendments) Bill 2020 (the Consequential
Amendments Bill) after referral by the Senate on 4 February 2021.
Recommendations
Recommendation 1: The committee recommends that assurances are
provided to Parliament regarding appropriate ongoing oversight by
security agencies of data sharing agreements and potential security risks.
Response:
The Government supports this recommendation.
An amendment was moved in the other chamber to ensure that data sharing
agreements take effect only once registered by the National Data
Commissioner (the Commissioner), rather than upon parties’ signature. This
change mitigates potential risks by supporting the Commissioner to work
with relevant security agencies to identify agreements which may pose
security risks, or not comply with the data sharing scheme, prior to any data
being shared. In addition, amendments were moved to ensure that foreign
entities are not able to become accredited, which means that data cannot be
shared with a foreign entity under the scheme.
Recommendation 2: The committee recommends that any relevant
findings of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and
Security inquiry into national security risks affecting the Australian
higher education and research sector are taken into account as part of
the development of any additional data codes and guidance material and
inform continued engagement with the national security community.
Response:
The Government supports this recommendation.
Since passage of the Bills, the Commissioner has made a data code, the Data
Availability and Transparency (National Security Measures) Code 2022,
establishing a default rule that all data sharing agreements made under the
scheme must provide that access to data shared with an Australian university
accredited under the scheme is restricted to individuals within the entity who
are Australian citizens or permanent residents. If a foreign national within an
Australian university is to be provided with access to shared data, the data
sharing agreement covering the data sharing must specifically name the
foreign national and provide details of their proposed role in the project.
This data code takes into account the findings of the Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Intelligence and Security inquiry into national security risks
affecting the Australian higher education and research sector, and the
Guidelines to Counter Foreign Interference in the Australian University
Sector.
Recommendation 3: The committee recommends that consideration is
given to whether amendments could be made to the bill, or further
clarification added to the explanatory memorandum to provide
additional guidance regarding privacy protections, particularly in
relation to the de-identifying of personal data that may be provided
under the bill’s data-sharing scheme.
Response:
The Government supports this recommendation.
Amendments were moved in the other chamber directly addressing the
committee’s concerns and strengthened the privacy protections in the Bill.
The privacy protections include:
• Minimising the sharing of personal information as far as possible
without compromising the data sharing purpose.
• Prohibiting the re-identification of data that has been de-identified.
• Prohibiting the storing or accessing of personal information outside of
Australia.
• Making it mandatory for Accredited Data Service Providers to
undertake any complex data integration for projects to inform
government policy and programs, and research and development.
• Requiring express consent for the sharing of biometric data.
Furthermore, the Commissioner has made a data code, the Data Availability
and Transparency Code 2022, requiring consent to be current and specific,
and providing that an individual may withdraw consent at any time with
prospective effect.
Additional privacy protections are also required, dependent on the data
sharing purpose. Personal information will be able to be shared without
consent for the delivery of government services where the individual
concerned is receiving the service. The amended Bill minimises the sharing
of personal information for informing government policies and programs, and
for research and development, by promoting de-identification of data.
