Australian Government response to the
Joint Standing Committee on
Implementation of the National Redress
Scheme inquiry into the operation of the
National Redress Scheme Report -
Redress: Journey to Justice -
November 2024
Page 1 of 20
INTRODUCTION
The Australian Government (the Government) welcomes the Final Report of the Joint Standing
Committee (the Committee) on Implementation of the National Redress Scheme for
Institutional Child Sexual Abuse (the Scheme). The Committee tabled its final report titled
Redress: Journey to Justice (the Report) on 26 November 2024. The Government
acknowledges the significant contributions made by survivors and stakeholders over the course
of the inquiry. The participation of survivors and stakeholders is critical to ensure the Scheme
delivers redress to survivors of institutional child sexual abuse.
The Report delivers important recommendations and insights informed by over
50 submissions and 11 public hearings through the course of the inquiry. The Government
is committed to the implementation of a number of recommendations made by the Committee
and acknowledges that several of the recommendations require ongoing engagement with the
Scheme’s state and territory partners.
Of the 29 recommendations made in the Report, the Government:
• Agrees to 14 recommendations
• Agrees in part to one recommendation
• Agrees in principle to five recommendations
• Notes seven recommendations
• Does not agree to two recommendations.
As of February 2026, the Scheme has received over 74,500 applications, with around
46,500 applications on hand and being processed. This Scheme has now surpassed the total
number of applications initially estimated by the Royal Commission into Institutional
Responses to Child Sexual Abuse.
The Scheme is legislated to close to new applications on 30 June 2027, operating for a further
year to assess applications by 1 July 2028. In 2024-25, the Scheme made 5,035 decisions.
In the same year, 19,729 people applied to the Scheme.
There is dignity in a prompt response and the Department of Social Services (the Department),
as the Scheme administrator, is committed to positioning itself to meet the challenge
of increased applications.
This will be achieved by cultural, innovative, evidence-based and performance reforms,
as well as engaging with risk. Significant efforts have already been made to enhance the
quality of decision making through the introduction of new Statement of Reasons templates,
administrative law training for Independent Decision Makers and procedural fairness advice.
In 2026 and beyond, the Department is focused on finalising applications as efficiently and
as quickly as possible. This will be achieved through tangible, innovative and
evidence-based initiatives such as the Multi-Disciplinary Team, which has been established
to complete multiple aspects of application processing and fast-track simpler
applications - this focus will extend to applications received from funded support services,
whose applications are more complete and easier to progress.
Page 2 of 20
The 2023-24 Budget provided an additional $80.1 million to extend Redress Support Services
to 30 June 2027 and as part of the 2024-25 Budget, support for redress applicants was
strengthened, with $26.1 million over four years to provide targeted support to applicants who
submit incomplete or otherwise unactionable applications. The 2025-26 Budget has also
included $27.2 million in additional funding to support services for applicants.
In April 2024, significant legislative amendments came into effect to improve the Scheme’s
accessibility and transparency for survivors. The amendments included removing the
restriction on survivors applying from gaol, refining the special assessment process for
survivors with serious criminal convictions, allowing applicants to provide additional
information when requesting a review of their redress offer and establishing reassessments for
applicants who named an institution that subsequently joins the Scheme after their application
has been finalised.
The Department has also redeveloped the Scheme website and provided easy-read factsheets
and explanatory animations to support survivors engaging with the Scheme. Work will
continue to raise awareness about the Scheme with a particular focus on First Nations people,
people with disability, culturally and linguistically diverse communities, and people living
in regional and remote Australia.
Page 3 of 20
Redress: Journey to Justice
Recommendations made by the Committee
Recommendation 1
1.30 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government seek agreement from state
and territory governments to extend the National Redress Scheme beyond 2028,
including agreement on extending existing state power referrals to the Commonwealth.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Government recognises and appreciates the strong interest from survivors, institutions,
and other impacted stakeholders regarding the legislated closure date of the Scheme.
The Government notes the Committee’s new inquiry into the continuing operation of the
Scheme and is committed to supporting this inquiry and considering its findings.
As outlined in responses to recommendations 26 and 27, the eighth anniversary review of the
Scheme may also provide a mechanism to explore options and advice on the management
of Scheme closure, in consultation with the Scheme’s state and territory government partners.
Concurrently, the Government remains focused on ensuring that survivors of institutional
child sexual abuse are supported to apply for redress before the legislated application closing
date of 30 June 2027. The Scheme continues to prioritise timely, trauma-informed outcomes
for survivors, and is committed to progressing applications with care, clarity, and respect.
Recommendation 2
1.31 The Committee recommends that if extending the National Redress Scheme in all
respects is not agreed, the Australian Government and state and territory governments
should consider:
• Asking potential redress applicants to register by a set date to allow registered
survivors to apply for redress after 30 June 2027.
• Extending aspects of the Scheme, such as access to psychological care
(counselling) and/or direct personal responses.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
As noted in response to recommendation 1, the Government is committed to ensuring that all
eligible survivors who apply to the Scheme prior to the legislated application closing date
of 30 June 2027 receive redress outcomes, including redress payments.
In addition, the Government remains committed to providing eligible survivors with access
to counselling and psychological care, and the opportunity to receive a direct personal
response. These components are central to the Scheme’s trauma-informed approach and
reflect our ongoing commitment to supporting survivors with dignity and respect.
Page 4 of 20
Recommendation 3
1.32 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government should provide additional
funding to the Department of Social Services, Knowmore Legal Services and
Redress Support Services to ensure all redress applications can be finalised on time.
The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government, through the Attorney-General’s Department, funds Knowmore Legal
Services (Knowmore) to deliver free, trauma-informed, culturally sensitive advice to survivors
of institutional child sexual abuse on their legal options for accessing redress and assistance
from the Scheme.
The Government also funds 42 Redress Support Services. These services provide coverage
in each state and territory, including outreach to regional and remote areas.
The 2023-24 Budget provided an additional $80.1 million to extend Redress Support Services
to 30 June 2027. The 2024-25 Budget provided an additional $7.2 million for Knowmore and
$26.1 million over four years to provide targeted support to applicants who submit incomplete
or otherwise unactionable applications. The 2025-26 Budget also included an additional
$27.2 million in additional funding to support services for applicants with additional funding
in 2025-26 of $11.5 million for Knowmore, and $15.7 million for Redress Support Services.
To support the Scheme’s operation additional funding has also been provided over the past
three Budgets:
• 2025-26 - $119.6 million of Departmental funding to maintain the ongoing operation
of the Scheme.
• 2024-25 - $92.4 million to meet projected costs of delivering the Scheme.
• 2023-24 - $62.1 million over five years from 2023–24 to support the administration
of the Scheme.
Recommendation 4
1.33 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government should begin a public
awareness campaign to ensure:
• Survivors and potential redress applicants know that they have limited time to make
an application.
• Survivors with an application on hold are told that the Scheme is closing.
The Australian Government agrees in principle to this recommendation.
The Department employs a targeted communication strategy to raise awareness of the
Scheme and its support services, including tailored advice for First Nations people,
people with disability and people who speak languages other than English. This strategy will
be further co-designed with Redress Support Services, noting the increasing application
numbers suggest there is growing awareness of the Scheme in the general community.
Page 5 of 20
Recommendation 5
1.51 The Committee recommends that the Department of Social Services should:
• Make reasonable adjustments and allow exceptions to the Scheme’s application
procedures.
• Do this subject to individual circumstances and the risks in each case, such as where
a survivor has severe disability or a communication barrier.
1.52 This should include:
• Steps for completing the redress application, including:
o How questions must be answered.
o Receiving information in alternative formats, including in languages other
than spoken English.
• Procedures whereby a redress applicant’s documents, identity or signatures can
be witnessed or recorded by electronic or virtual means.
The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Scheme continues to develop and implement ways to ensure submitted applications
contain all required information. Recent inclusions are:
• An amended letter suite when seeking additional information under section 24 of the
National Redress Scheme for Institutional Child Sexual Abuse Act 2018 (the Act);
supporting applicants to better understand what clarifying information is required
and to afford procedural fairness.
• Choice for applicants in how they can respond to letters, including through
Redress Support Services, a direct phone call to the Scheme, or in writing.
The Government funds 42 Redress Support Services nationally, to provide practical and
emotional support for people who have experienced institutional child sexual abuse and wish
to apply for redress through the Scheme. Of these, 21 provide specialist support,
including to people with disability, and 14 have been provided additional funding to support
applicants receiving correspondence under section 24.
The Scheme has adapted to allow applicants to upload photo versions of documents,
such as acceptance letters, through MyGov instead of submitting scanned copies.
This makes it easier for applicants who may not have access to a printer or scanner,
or who face other challenges like homelessness or living in remote areas, to submit the
necessary documentation. Procedures are established to confirm an applicant's identity
electronically through their Centrelink Customer Reference Number
or Department of Veterans’ Affairs number. Certified identity documents can
be electronically submitted to the Department to confirm identity.
Page 6 of 20
The Scheme continues to provide alternative options to support for submitting an application,
including, but not limited to:
• Confirming the applicant’s identity in other ways if they do not have the required
documents or cannot visit a Services Australia service centre. For example, those
living in remote communities, former child migrants or those currently in gaol.
• The ability to appoint an assistance or legal nominee as someone who can act
on a survivor's behalf when liaising with the Scheme.
• Enabling a person with disability to submit an unsigned application to the Scheme
where all other options to support the applicant to sign (i.e. a nominee arrangement
or electronic signature via myGov) are not appropriate.
• Providing translation services for applicants with supporting material in languages
other than English.
The Scheme continues to improve the accessibility and usability of its processes for survivors
and their nominees. Over the life of the Scheme, actions have been taken to streamline the
application process as much as possible and support applicants; this includes a guidebook
in plain English and audio and videos, to support applicants and their nominees to complete
the application form. The Scheme’s website and instructional materials are now in accessible
format, multilingual, Auslan and easy to read versions to cater to different audiences.
Recommendation 6
1.53 The Committee recommends that the Department of Social Services:
• Develop ways for applicants (or their nominee) to track the progress of redress
applications.
• Continue to develop plainer language and presentation in written communication.
• Continue to adjust communication style according to the survivor’s needs, including
correspondence from the Scheme to applicants.
• Take greater care to respect nominee arrangements.
• Continue to develop resources in languages other than English and in a variety
of accessible formats.
The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
From 12 October 2024, applicants who have their Redress application linked to their
myGov account can receive updates on the progress of their application, in addition
to being able to seek this information from the Scheme by phone.
The Department is continuously improving written communication products and styles for
applicants in line with trauma-informed principles, as outlined in response
to recommendation 5.
The Department is trialing a process with Redress Support Services to receive applicants’
nominee forms electronically, instead of in hard copy only. This has assisted in expediting the
establishment of nominee arrangements with Redress Support Services and reduced contact
with applicants to confirm their nominee arrangements.
Page 7 of 20
Recommendation 7
1.54 The Committee recommends that the Department of Social Services have a greater role
in connecting survivors with institutions:
• Where a survivor has indicated that they would like a direct personal response.
• When the survivor indicates that they would like the Department to assist with these
arrangements.
The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government acknowledges some survivors may find the process of initiating a direct
personal response a challenging and confronting experience.
In May 2023, the Government released the Final Response to the Report of the Second Year
Review of the National Redress Scheme (the Government’s response). The Government’s
response supported recommendation 4.7 to increase accessibility and support for survivors
wishing to engage with a direct personal response and committed to the creation
of a Direct Personal Response Action Plan. As a result, following a successful pilot which
began in 2022, the Direct Personal Response Information and Support Service was
established in April 2023. Survivors can find more information about how to access a direct
personal response on the Scheme’s website.
Recommendation 8
1.55 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government publish six monthly data
updates regarding trends in the Scheme, including:
• The rate at which new redress applications are being received each month.
• The rate of determinations being made each month.
• Trends categorised into survivor groups, such as First Nations, disability and care
leavers.
• The proportion of survivors who receive a direct and personal response.
• Review requests and how often the Scheme revises the original determination.
The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government is committed to providing transparency to survivors, institutions,
Government partners and the Australian public on the efficiency and effectiveness of the
Scheme’s implementation. Since February 2019, a monthly report has been published on the
Scheme’s website, providing updates on Scheme changes and relevant aggregated data
to indicate how the Scheme is performing. This reporting function has evolved over time
to reflect new and emerging Scheme trends.
The Department has commenced releasing additional data points recommended by the
Committee in an aggregated form on the Scheme website as part of our monthly reports.
The Act requires that aggregated data be provided in a form that does not disclose,
either directly or indirectly, information about a particular person or institution.
Consideration is also given to how best to present data for readability and accessibility purposes.
Page 8 of 20
Recommendation 9
1.56 The Committee recommends that all decisions regarding redress eligibility
be determined by panels of independent decision makers. Each panel should have
a minimum of three members.
1.57 If this recommendation cannot be fully implemented or agreed upon, then the
Committee recommends that all ineligible determinations should be automatically escalated
to a panel review. Each panel should have a minimum of three members.
The Australian Government does not agree to this recommendation.
All applicants who receive a determination for redress can request a review of that decision
under section 75 of the Act, including in circumstances where they are found ineligible
or disagree with their monetary award. The Act does not allow a decision to be made
by ‘panels’ of Independent Decision Makers and instead require the decision to be made
by one Independent Decision Maker. This is the case for any determination – including
original (section 29), review (section 75) and reassessment decisions (section 71D).
Recommendation 10
1.59 The Committee recommends that the Minister for Social Services and the
Department of Social Services continue to hold regular survivor roundtables,
including in regional locations.
The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government is committed to holding regular Survivor Roundtables for the life of the
Scheme, in addition to the six held to date, and acknowledges the important information
sharing and interactions that Roundtables provide for survivors, Redress Support Services,
advocacy groups and Redress Scheme staff. The location of Roundtables,
including in regional locations, will be considered as appropriate.
Page 9 of 20
Recommendation 11
1.64 The Committee recommends that the Department of Social Services urgently undertake
a public information campaign to increase awareness of the Scheme and redress support
services. This should include:
• Media advertising.
• Additional resources for redress support services to share among community
organisations.
• Additional information and resources to be made available at Centrelink offices.
• Information and resources in accessible formats and languages other than English.
• Information about:
o Who can help with redress applications.
o Legal advice.
o Financial advice and financial counselling.
• The closing date for redress applications.
The Australian Government agrees in principle to this recommendation.
The Government is committed to ensuring survivors are aware that free
Redress Support Services are available to assist them to complete a redress application and
support them while their redress application is progressed by the Scheme.
The Department is committed to implementing its targeted communication plan,
as outlined in response to recommendation 4.
Recommendation 12
1.74 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government should publicly disclose
and report on:
• How many redress applications have named:
o An institution that has refused to join the Scheme.
o An institution intending to join the Scheme for longer than 12 months.
o The names of those institutions.
The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government is committed to working with institutions to ensure that survivors
of institutional child sexual abuse have access to redress.
As of February 2026, 20 institutions have declined to join the Scheme and are publicly
disclosed on the Scheme website. These institutions may be restricted from accessing future
Commonwealth Government grant funding (underpinned by the National Redress Scheme
Grant Connected Policy) and risk losing their charitable status and associated tax
concessions and benefits, if applicable.
Page 10 of 20
The Scheme website also includes a list of the participating status of institutions, including
those institutions that are intending to join the Scheme,
see www.nationalredress.gov.au/institutions-landing/institutions-have-not-joined.
The Government commits to disclosing aggregated data on the number of applications that
name an institution which has declined to join the Scheme, where total applications
exceed 20. This protects the privacy of applicants who have named the institution and
is consistent with the protected information provisions of the Act.
Recommendation 13
1.76 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider, before the
Scheme closes, what penalties will continue to be directed towards responsible institutions
that did not participate in the Scheme.
The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government is committed to working with state and territory governments, as Scheme
partners, to give further consideration to this recommendation through existing Scheme
governance mechanisms in accordance with the Intergovernmental Agreement on the
National Redress Scheme for Institutional Child Sexual Abuse (Intergovernmental
Agreement).
As noted in response to recommendation 12, the Government is committed to working with
institutions to ensure that survivors of institutional child sexual abuse have access to redress.
While the vast majority of institutions have worked in good faith with the Department
to determine their ability to participate in the Scheme, a small minority have declined to join
the Scheme despite meeting the participation requirements. These institutions are subject
to non-legislatively prescribed penalties. Where institutions indicate financial concerns,
the Scheme has a range of options to support their participation, including
part-participation.
Any decision to continue to impose current penalties or implement new penalties beyond the
end of the Scheme will be a matter for all governments to consider and will take into account
the voluntary nature under which institutions are requested to join the Scheme,
and their moral obligation to survivors to support their access to redress.
Page 11 of 20
Recommendation 14
1.92 The Committee recommends that the Department of Social Services update the
‘application for review of determination’ form to:
• Make the language plainer.
• Reduce the legal and technical jargon.
The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government supports the Department to undertake further work to review the
‘Application for Review of Determination’ form to simplify language for applicants,
including legal and technical language where possible, to ensure communication to applicants
is accessible. As part of this work, the Scheme also ensures that all are trauma-informed.
Recommendation 15
1.93 The Committee recommends that legislation be amended to expressly provide that
review of a redress determination cannot result in:
• A redress offer being reduced.
• Eligibility for redress being reversed.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
In May 2023, the Government agreed to recommendation 5.1 of the Second Year Review
of the Scheme and committed to enabling additional information to be provided to inform
a request for review of an application, and ensuring review determinations cannot be less
than the original determination when based on the same evidence.
The Government implemented these measures through the National Redress Scheme for
Institutional Child Sexual Abuse Amendment Act 2024 which came into effect
on 4 April 2024. As of 17 February 2026, and since the commencement of these measures,
no determinations have caused an applicant’s eligibility to change from eligible to ineligible
and no determinations have caused a reduced payment to the survivor.1
1 Only one case over the life of the Scheme has had a reduced payment on review – this was before
the described measures came into effect, and was due to a correction in prior payment calculations.
Page 12 of 20
Recommendation 16
1.101 The Committee recommends that a consistent approach to virginity testing
in Australia should be articulated. The practice should be the subject of a separate inquiry.
The Australian Government agrees in part to this recommendation.
In May 2025, the Department provided additional guidance to Independent Decision Makers
on virginity testing, ensuring the Scheme applies a consistent approach to critically assessing
redress applications describing virginity testing. This additional guidance includes
contextualising virginity testing with the Scheme’s definition of ‘sexual abuse’ under the Act
and the United Nations Interagency Statement on the Elimination of Virginity Testing.
Given the Scheme’s additional guidance and positive reception from impacted stakeholders,
the Government does not support a separate inquiry into this matter. The Scheme is prioritising
progressing applications describing virginity testing in an efficient, consistent and
trauma-informed manner.
Recommendation 17
1.114 The Committee recommends that the National Redress Scheme pay a fixed sum
to delegated legal practitioners where a survivor elects to receive legal advice:
• Before proceeding with a redress application.
• Before accepting a redress offer.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
As noted in response to recommendation 3, the Government continues to ensure the
operations of the Scheme are adequately resourced to support survivors in accessing free,
trauma-informed advice through Knowmore. Survivors can engage with Knowmore before,
during, or after their involvement with the Scheme.
The Scheme recognises that some survivors may choose to seek support from private legal
practitioners. The Scheme will continue to explore appropriate avenues to engage with
private practitioners to support redress applicants, while ensuring survivors are informed
and supported throughout their redress journey.
Page 13 of 20
Recommendation 18
1.115 The Committee recommends that before redress offers are accepted,
the Department of Social Services encourages in writing for survivors to seek:
• Legal advice.
• Financial advice or financial counselling and that the Department of Social Services
publish this advice on the Scheme’s website.
The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Department encourages survivors (and their nominees) to access the Scheme’s free
legal advice and financial counselling support services provided by Knowmore.
Information about these free services is included in all written correspondence to survivors
and has been available from the Scheme’s website since it commenced on 1 July 2018.
Recommendation 19
1.116 The Committee recommends that the Department of Social Services take additional
measures to protect redress payments from inadvertent loss, including by:
• Verifying who has access to (or control over) the bank account into which money
is going to be paid.
• Notifying redress applicants of which bank account into which funds are due
to be deposited before the transaction occurs.
• Pausing the payment process to allow time for verification.
The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Scheme has implemented mitigating process improvement initiatives, including:
• Confirmation of all applicants’ bank account details against information held
in Services Australia’s Customer First or Department of Veterans’ Affairs records
for an applicant receiving current Government support payments if the applicant
does not send in bank statements.
• Proof of Record Ownership (PoRO) confirmed with applicants on inbound and
outbound phone calls regarding redress payments queries; callers are required
to achieve enhanced PoRO with questions from the applicants’ Customer First
records. If applicants are unable to achieve enhanced PoRO, then applicants are
requested to upload in myGov their identity information.
• Verifying who has access to (or control over) the bank account into which money
is going to be paid for all applicants identified as at risk. The Scheme only pays into
a bank account that is in the applicant’s name.
• Payment Choice Forms (PCF) updated in May 2025 for ease of use for applicants
and nominees. The improvement of the PCF has been significant with a success rate
of 98% in safe payments made to applicants on the first attempt.
Page 14 of 20
Recommendation 20
1.117 The Committee recommends that the Commonwealth encourages state and territory
governments to urgently change laws to address claim farming and exploitative practices,
including by:
• Making it unlawful for lawyers to charge contingency fees for services delivered with
respect to National Redress Scheme applications.
• Imposing a legal obligation on lawyers to advise a potential client of the availability
of free services (Knowmore Legal Service and the Redress Support Services),
and to certify such advice has been provided, before executing a costs agreement for
a National Redress Scheme application.
• Capping fees that lawyers can charge for services delivered with respect
to National Redress Scheme applications.
• Making it an offence for any person to:
o contact a person without their consent and solicit or induce them to make
a National Redress Scheme application; or
o give or receive any money or other benefit in exchange for a referral to make
a National Redress Scheme application.
• Establishing a set of expected practice standards for lawyers and survivor advocates
providing services with respect to National Redress Scheme applications.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Government strongly condemns exploitative practices by legal service providers which
seek to profit from survivors of institutional child sexual abuse.
The Government encourages all state and territory governments to implement legislation
to curb sharp practices such as claim farming.
The Government notes legislation passed by the Queensland, New South Wales and South
Australian Governments (noting these may not be specific to or encompass redress).
The Government also supports continued leadership by the Ministers' Redress Scheme
Governance Board to identify opportunities to further support survivors engaging with the
Scheme. The Department also regularly engages with state and territory governments to share
insights and mitigation strategies available, where possible.
Page 15 of 20
Recommendation 21
1.118The Committee recommends that the Commonwealth encourages state and territory
governments to codify in legislation the basis on which the courts may grant permanent
stays.
1.119This should be consistent with the High Court’s ruling in the GLJ case.
The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
In response to the Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse,
all states and territories removed statutes of limitation for historic child sexual abuse matters
to ensure access to justice for survivors.
Any response to the High Court of Australia’s decision in GLJ v the Trustees of the
Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of Lismore (2023) 414 ALR 635 (GLJ),
is the responsibility of state and territory governments who are responsible for respective
civil liability legislation.
Recommendation 22
1.125 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government:
• Fund additional redress support services to provide dedicated support to:
o Survivors from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds, including for
travel and translation.
o Survivors with disability.
o Survivors living in regional areas.
o First Nations survivors and culturally safe settings.
1.126 The Department of Social Services should coordinate outreach efforts among redress
support services.
The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government is committed to funding culturally appropriate and accessible
Redress Support Services for survivors through its existing established network,
as outlined in response to recommendations 3 and 4.
The Department has existing mechanisms in place to coordinate Redress Support Services’
outreach efforts by encouraging referrals between services and convening regular meetings
of Redress Support Services operating in each jurisdiction. These arrangements will continue
and are periodically reviewed to ensure they are effective.
Page 16 of 20
Recommendation 23
1.127 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government extend funding terms for
redress support services until 2 years following the extended expiration date of the Scheme.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
As outlined in response to recommendation 3, the Government recognises the importance of
ensuring survivors can access free support from a Redress Support Service and Knowmore.
Recommendation 24
1.132 The Committee recommends that:
• The Department of Social Services review the basis on which survivor names and
addresses are shared with law enforcement agencies.
• The Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission should cease sharing information
about survivors if this is predictably done for purposes such as pursuing outstanding
fines or debts.
• Protected information provisions should be amended to prevent survivor information
from being used in this way.
The Australian Government does not agree to this recommendation.
When considering an application from a person with a serious criminal conviction,
the Scheme Operator may choose to implement the special assessment process
in accordance with subsection 63(3) of the Act.
Receiving a Nationally Coordinated Criminal History Check conducted by the
Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission (ACIC) is a necessary step to inform the special
assessment process, including the Scheme Operator’s determination of a person’s entitlement
to redress.
By consenting to the sharing of their information with the Scheme for the purpose
of a Criminal History Check, a person acknowledges their personal information may be used
by police agencies for the purposes of law enforcement. Existing legislation permits
information to be used in this way, including subsection 96(3) of the Act and the
Australian Crime Commission Act 2002.
The Government also notes that applicant (and institutional) information may be shared with
law enforcement agencies for child safe reporting purposes (set out under section 96 of the
Act). This is an important mechanism to ensure the protection of children.
Page 17 of 20
Recommendation 25
1.133 The Committee recommends that the Department of Social Services develop
a framework for enforcement of protected information provisions.
1.134 The framework must be published on the Scheme’s website together with advice
on how to report suspected breaches.
The Australian Government agrees in principle to this recommendation.
The Department is developing an internal unauthorised disclosure policy and framework
to codify the Scheme’s process for managing and once finalised, consideration will be given
to the publication of additional information on the Scheme’s public website, including via
updates to the Scheme’s existing suite of protected information factsheets.
Recommendation 26
1.137 The Committee recommends that the Eight Year Review of the National Redress
Scheme consider:
• Possible alternative options if redress cannot be offered to a survivor because
a responsible institution does not fulfil its intention to join the Scheme by 30 June 2027.
• The effectiveness of Queensland laws intended to address claim farming, including
whether there is scope to refine or improve similar laws.
• The Scheme’s capacity to finalise all applications before the Scheme closes.
The Australian Government agrees in principle to this recommendation, noting:
• Some of these issues may be examined sooner outside of the eighth anniversary
review process.
• The eighth anniversary review will be undertaken in partnership with state and
territory government partners under the Scheme’s Intergovernmental Agreement.
The Government is committed to encouraging institutions named in applications to join the
Scheme and will continue to use Funder of Last Resort provisions to ensure eligible
applicants are offered redress and, where appropriate, public naming of institutions and
associated penalties for institutions that do not join the Scheme.
The Government strongly condemns exploitative practices by legal service providers which
seek to profit from survivors of institutional child sexual abuse. The Government encourages
all state and territory governments to implement legislation to curb sharp practices such
as claim farming. The Government notes legislation passed by the Queensland,
New South Wales and South Australian Governments (noting these may not be specific
to or encompass redress).
The Government is also committed to improving application processing timeframes for all
applications received by the legislated application closing date of 30 June 2027.
Page 18 of 20
Recommendation 27
1.138 The Committee recommends, that subject to the National Redress Scheme being
extended, the Eighth Year Review of the Scheme consider:
• The preferred basis on which the Scheme should eventually close; for example, based
on a fixed date or when application numbers drop below a fixed threshold.
• The best option for an eventual closure if governments are likely to agree on only some
aspects of the Scheme being extended.
1.139 If an extension is not possible, the Eighth Year Review should consider what
is needed to close the Scheme as planned, including how to ensure all existing and future
redress applications are processed on time.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of planning for Scheme closure in a way that
is transparent, consultative, and responsive to the needs of survivors and participating
institutions. The Government remains committed to supporting survivors to apply before the
legislated closing date of 30 June 2027 and ensuring all applications are processed
in a timely, trauma-informed manner.
Recommendation 28
1.140 The Committee recommends that the respective Senate and House of Representatives
procedural committees should inquire into the accessibility of parliamentary committee
processes, including:
• Protocols for receiving, handling and publishing evidence received from witnesses who
have experienced trauma.
• The suitability of House and Senate standing orders and statutory requirements when
committees take evidence from witnesses who have experienced trauma or are
otherwise vulnerable.
• The accessibility of committee information.
The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The government thanks all people who provided evidence to the Committee,
including and particularly those survivors of institutional child sexual abuse who
participated in-person and via written submissions.
Page 19 of 20
Recommendation 29
1.142 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with state and
territory governments on a national framework for redress and/or reparation schemes.
This could include developing knowledge around best practices, scheme design and
administration.
The Australian Government agrees in principle to this recommendation.
The Government supports the exchange of knowledge and use of best practice to inform
similar redress and reparation schemes. The Government will further consider this
recommendation in partnership with state and territory governments.
Page 20 of 20
