Australian Government response to the House of
Representatives Standing Committee on Health, Aged Care
and Sport Report:
Issues Paper relating to the health impacts of alcohol and
other drugs in Australia
MARCH 2026
The Australian Government thanks the House of Representatives Standing Committee on
Health, Aged Care and Sport (the Committee) for its work to conduct a wide-ranging Inquiry
into the health impacts of alcohol and other drugs in Australia. Australia faces growing
health and social harms from alcohol and drug use, highlighting the need for a more
coordinated, health-focused approach that addresses stigma, service gaps, and the needs of
priority populations through prevention, treatment and harm reduction.
The Government provides the following response to the Committee’s recommendations
contained in the Issues Paper:
Recommendation 1
6.11 The Committee suggests that the successive Standing Committee on Health, Aged
Care and Sport (or equivalent) in the 48th Parliament consider completing a full inquiry
report into the health impacts of alcohol and other drugs in Australia.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
Recommendation 2
6.12 The Committee recommends that the Department of Health and Aged Care consider
public submissions and evidence received by this inquiry as it prepares advice to
Government on revisions to the National Drug Strategy.
The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Department of Health, Disability and Ageing (formerly known as Department of Health
and Aged Care) agrees to consider public submissions and evidence received by the Inquiry
into the health impacts of alcohol and other drugs (AOD) in Australia when providing advice
to government on the National Drug Strategy (NDS).
The department notes that the NDS is a whole-of-government document with shared
responsibility between health and law enforcement agencies, across Australian, state and
territory governments and that questions about future iterations of the NDS are yet to be
tested with all governments and relevant agencies.
In addition, it is important that any advice aligns with the Government’s commitments
under the National Agreement on Closing the Gap. First Nations people experience a
disproportionately higher burden of harm from AOD compared to other Australians due to
complex factors including intergenerational trauma, social disadvantage, and limited access
to culturally appropriate services.
