OFFICIAL
Australian Government response to the House
of Representatives Standing Committee on
Regional Development, Infrastructure and
Transport report:
Inquiry into the implications of severe weather
events on the national regional, rural and remote
road network
January 2026
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Contents
Overview ........................................................................................................................... 3
Australian Government response ...................................................................................... 4
Recommendation 1: ...................................................................................................................... 4
Recommendation 2: ...................................................................................................................... 5
Recommendation 3: ...................................................................................................................... 6
Recommendation 4: ...................................................................................................................... 7
Recommendation 5: ...................................................................................................................... 9
Recommendation 6: .................................................................................................................... 10
Recommendation 7: .................................................................................................................... 11
Recommendation 8: .................................................................................................................... 12
Recommendation 9: .................................................................................................................... 13
Recommendation 10: .................................................................................................................. 14
Recommendation 11: .................................................................................................................. 15
Recommendation 12: .................................................................................................................. 17
Recommendation 13: .................................................................................................................. 18
Recommendation 14: .................................................................................................................. 19
Recommendation 15: .................................................................................................................. 20
Recommendation 16: .................................................................................................................. 22
Recommendation 17: .................................................................................................................. 23
Recommendation 18: .................................................................................................................. 24
Recommendation 19: .................................................................................................................. 25
Recommendation 20: .................................................................................................................. 26
Recommendation 21: .................................................................................................................. 27
Recommendation 22: .................................................................................................................. 28
Recommendation 23: .................................................................................................................. 29
Recommendation 24: .................................................................................................................. 30
Recommendation 25: .................................................................................................................. 31
Recommendation 26: .................................................................................................................. 32
2
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Overview
The Australian Government notes the report by the House of Representatives Standing Committee
on Regional Development, Infrastructure and Transport (the Committee) on the Inquiry into the
implications of severe weather events on the national regional, rural and remote road network.
The response reflects the Australian Government’s commitment to safeguarding Australia’s critical
road infrastructure against the growing threat of severe weather events. The number of Australian
Government departments and agencies providing input to the response reflects the complexity of
the issues considered by the Committee, and included:
• Austrade
• Australian Climate Service
• Bureau of Meteorology
• Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation
• Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water
• Department of Employment and Workplace Relations
• Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
• Department of Industry, Science and Resources
• Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development, Communications, Sport
and the Arts
• Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
• Department of the Treasury
• Infrastructure Australia
• National Emergency Management Agency.
The response identifies the key strategies being used to strengthen the resilience of road
infrastructure across regional and remote Australia, including increasing investment in infrastructure
resilience in alignment with the Australian Government’s Infrastructure Policy Statement, enhancing
predictive weather modelling, integrating climate adaptation into road planning, and strengthening
emergency management coordination.
These strategies have been informed by reviews such as Phase One of the Road and Rail Supply
Chain Resilience Review and the Independent Review of the Australian Climate Service.
The response underscores the importance of collaboration and data sharing across all levels of
government, and the need for continuous monitoring and assessment. The effective use of existing
cross-government forums such as the Infrastructure and Transport Ministers’ Meeting, the National
Emergency Management Ministers’ Meeting and the Local Government Ministers’ Forum will enable
all levels of government to work together to adapt to climate challenges to Australia’s road
infrastructure.
3
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Australian Government response
The Australian Government’s response to the Inquiry into the implications of severe weather events
on the national regional, rural and remote road network is set out in detail below.
Recommendation 1:
2.66 The Committee recommends that the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organisation’s Transport Network Strategic Investment Tool be utilised by the Australian
Climate Service to examine projected impacts on strategic road network routes
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) Transport Network
Strategic Investment Tool (TraNSIT) shows the impact from current road closures to freight and
supply chains and provides a scenario planning tool that allows stakeholders and users to test future
disruption scenarios of road closures.
The Government has provided $3.8m funding over 4 years from 2022-23 to 2025-26 to enhance
TraNSIT with supply chain resilience modelling capabilities. This will improve reporting on
disruptions, including the impacts to communities, along with scenario planning to identify future
network pressures and improve evidence for investment decision-making.
The TraNSIT tool provided analysis to the Australian Climate Service (ACS) as part of the National
Climate Risk Assessment evidence base. This analysis examined:
• How supply chains are at risk from climate change in 2050 and 2090 for different levels of
global warming
- how and where are they exposed
- the most important vulnerabilities – both physical and in terms of critical points of
network vulnerability
- The extent to which the projected risks are being managed
• Which communities or sectors are likely to be most directly affected by impacts on future
supply chains
• What Local Government Areas become more vulnerable to disasters due to extreme events
and supply chain impacts in a different part of the country.
4
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 2:
2.68 The Committee recommends that clearer demarcation of climate data and sharing
responsibilities between the Bureau of Meteorology and the Commonwealth Scientific and
Industrial Research Organisation and state and territory and local governments be established
to facilitate adequate warning and risk mitigation.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government supports improved climate data sharing between all relevant
stakeholders.
Since 2022, the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water has established
and served as the secretariat of the National Partnership for Climate Projections (NPCP). The
partnership arrangement is designed to enhance federal to state collaboration on climate data and
data sharing. It is a voluntary collaboration that aims to develop a consistent approach to deliver
comparable, robust, fit-for purpose future climate information to assess climate risks and inform
adaptation planning.
The ACS is supporting an uplift of natural climate and hazard data through the Bureau of
Meteorology and CSIRO as partners in the ACS. The ACS supports national adaptation and disaster
risk reduction by providing climate risk data, insights and resources to enable effective risk
monitoring and adaptation across sectors.
In addition, whilst noting it would not be CSIRO’s role to provide a warning system, CSIRO has
developed a suite of decision support tools to support planning, preparation and response across
multiple hazards that would impact on a road network. As well as TraNSIT, these include the
National Bushfire Intelligence Capability and AQFx.
5
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 3:
3.186 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government propose that road asset
infrastructure resilience planning and investment frameworks be made a standing item on the
Infrastructure and Transport Senior Officials’ Committee meeting agenda.
The Australian Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
Infrastructure sustainability and resilience, including for road assets, is one of the three core
strategic themes of the Infrastructure Policy Statement (IPS). The IPS sets out the Australian
Government’s intention to invest in projects that improve the resilience of critical road and rail
corridors, including through upgrading existing assets that are vulnerable to risks; enhancing
networks to achieve greater redundancy; as well as building and maintaining networks to a higher
standard, where appropriate, to create more resilient infrastructure following extreme weather
events.
The IPS and its strategic theme of resilience is embedded in the Federation Funding Agreement
Schedule for Land Transport Infrastructure Projects (2024-2029)(FFAS), and will guide decisions by
the Australian Government regarding infrastructure planning and investment.
The Australian Government is committed to working in partnership with the states and territories to
address critical resilience issues across roads in Australia. Given the importance of the issue, road
resilience will continue to be an item which is regularly discussed and progressed at both the
Infrastructure and Transport Senior Officials’ Committee (ITSOC) and the Infrastructure and
Transport Ministers’ Meeting (ITMM).
6
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 4:
3.188 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government propose that the Infrastructure
and Transport Senior Officials’ Committee, in consultation with Austroads and other relevant
stakeholders, progress the development of national road infrastructure resilience guidelines
to inform asset management and project investment.
The Australian Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
The Australian Government recognises the importance of incorporating risk management and
disaster resilience in road infrastructure project design and asset management, in light of the
increasing frequency of severe weather events. Significant work is already underway to develop and
improve guidance and knowledge on road asset resilience in response to a changing climate.
The Australian Government has undertaken Australia's first National Climate Risk Assessment. This
risk assessment provides a national picture of risks and includes analysis on infrastructure and the
built environment.
Through Austroads, the Australian Government is also supporting several projects that will
contribute towards more resilient asset management across all levels of government. This includes:
• Climate Change and Natural Hazards Risk Assessment and Adaptation Planning: This project
developed a framework for undertaking climate change and natural hazard risk assessments
and developing adaptation plans. The guidelines draw on leading practice within Austroads
transport agencies and internationally. The guidelines were published in November 2024.
• Incorporating climate change resilience in asset management: The report provides practical
guidance and user cases for asset managers within the transport sector to embed
consideration of climate resilience into asset management. The report was published in
November 2024.
• Identify, Prioritise and Deploy Adaptation Actions: This project will provide a detailed
database of proven and potential prioritised adaptation actions, activities, and controls for
the transport sector. The database will support prioritisation and rapid deployment of best
value adaptation actions across transport projects and operations. The project commenced
in October 2024.
• Develop Climate Resilience and Adaptation Metrics for Transport Assets and Services: This
project will develop climate resilience and adaptation measurement metrics that can be
used to monitor the performance of transport assets and services to climate-related
hazards. The project commenced in February 2025.
• Research Climate Resilience Needs and Guidance Approaches: This project will examine the
need for and nature of guidance for climate change resilience of transport assets, network
management and operations, and plan for its development and approach to delivery. The
project commenced in November 2024.
Separately, Infrastructure Australia provides resources for improving infrastructure resilience
throughout the planning, delivery and operation of assets. Two advisory papers, released as part of
the A Pathway to Infrastructure Resilience program, set out a whole-of-system, all-hazards approach
to resilience planning:
• Advisory Paper 1: Opportunities for Systematic Change identifies long-term directions for
transformational and systemic change in infrastructure planning to achieve infrastructure for
resilience.
7
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
• Advisory Paper 2: Guidance for asset owners and operators in the short term outlines a
series of short-term actions for asset owners and operators as the first steps towards this
change.
8
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 5:
3.190 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government establish a review into the
distribution formula of the Financial Assistance Grants road component.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
On 21 March 2024, the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Regional Development,
Infrastructure and Transport accepted the Australian Government’s referral for an inquiry into the
local government sector’s sustainability. Among other issues, the Inquiry will consider the financial
sustainability and funding of local government and the role of the Australian Government in
addressing these issues.
The Australian Government welcomes the Inquiry as it will provide an opportunity for all
perspectives on the issues affecting local government to be heard, and help inform how the
Australian Government can strengthen councils’ capacity to deliver better outcomes in our
communities.
9
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 6:
3.192 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government review funding allocation to
support road asset maintenance works under its Infrastructure Investment Program and
consider other measures to incentivise increased investment in maintenance works.
The Australian Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
The Australian Government is committed to exploring measures to address these challenges and
ensure effective asset management across all regions.
As part of the FFAS, the Australian Government increased its funding to the states and territories for
asset maintenance works on the National Land Transport Network (NLTN) from $350 million in 2023-
24 to $460 million in 2024-25 (indexed at 2.5 per cent per annum). This reflects the importance the
Australian Government places on maintaining critical road and rail infrastructure. This funding is in
addition to other investments through the Infrastructure Investment Program (IIP), including
subprograms.
In November 2023, the Australian Government announced improvements to a number of
subprograms of the IIP that enhance the safety, resilience and connectivity of our road network.
Regional Australia will directly benefit from the Australian Government increasing its annual
commitment towards the Roads to Recovery Program, which is progressively increasing from $500.0
million to reach $1.0 billion per year from 2027-28. This funding benefits local governments and
unincorporated areas responsible for local road infrastructure works.
The Road Safety Program will also continue to roll out lifesaving road treatments through to June
2026, many of which are in regional and remote areas.
10
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 7:
3.194 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, as part of the development of a
Federation Funding Agreements Schedule on transport infrastructure, assess options to
improve the alignment and coordination of funding programs and application and approval
processes with state and territory partner-funded bodies.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The IPS acknowledges that state, territory and local governments are primarily responsible for
land transport networks, and drive the planning, identification and delivery of infrastructure
projects.
The FFAS incorporates reforms to funding proposal and approval processes, including the
principle that the Australian Government’s investment decisions are informed by strategic
priorities and planning. This includes requirements for:
• projects to be subject to necessary due diligence processes, including as best as possible,
ensuring Commonwealth funding for delivery is not committed until a business case has
been completed and considered by all relevant parties
• proposals seeking Australian Government funding to demonstrate alignment to the IPS
• states and territories to submit an Annual Infrastructure Plan to enable the Australian
Government to understand the strategic context for their funding proposals. These Plans will
provide a long-term (10-year) view, including how projects will be sequenced and how the
states and territories will respond to cost pressures and other related impacts, such as
population growth, carbon emissions, regional development, and urban policy, including
housing, and will reflect local government priorities where relevant.
11
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 8:
3.195 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with state and territory
governments to establish consultation mechanisms with local governments to consider road
infrastructure priorities at the local level.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
Under the FFAS, states and territories are required to develop and provide the Australian
Government with an Annual Infrastructure Plan (Plan), which provides a long-term (10-year)
strategic view of a state/territory’s land transport infrastructure priorities. The Plans enable the
Australian Government to understand the strategic context for the states and territories’ project
proposals and enable the Australian Government to identify issues of national importance. The FFAS
notes the states and territories have the requisite knowledge and expertise to ensure the successful
delivery of projects through effective planning and risk management projects. The Plans should,
where relevant, reflect local government priorities within their jurisdiction.
The Australian Government, as well as state and territory governments, consult regularly with local
governments about road infrastructure matters. Additionally, the Australian Council of Local
Government (ACLG) enables local government representatives to engage directly with the Australian
Government on a range of issues.
12
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 9:
3.197 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government review the funding approval
timeframes as part of the joint Australian-State and Territory Government Disaster Recovery
Funding Arrangements.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
In February 2023, the Australian Government appointed Mr Andrew Colvin AO APM to undertake an
Independent Review of Commonwealth Disaster Funding (Colvin Review). The Colvin Review
considered how the Australian Government’s investment in disaster risk reduction, preparedness,
response and recovery could make Australian communities safer and more resilient to future
disasters.
Mr Colvin delivered his Final Report to the Australian Government on 30 April 2024. The Final Report
was publicly released on 25 October 2024. The Australian Government is currently considering the
findings and recommendations of the Colvin Review.
13
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 10:
3.199 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government implement options for greater
flexibility for betterment funding for resilient infrastructure builds, where structural, economic
or social benefits are identified, through Disaster Recovery Funding Arrangements eligibility
criteria following natural disaster events.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government supports the use of betterment funding in principle to reduce the overall
societal cost of responding to natural hazards and extreme events including those made more
frequent or severe by climate change.
Under standard Disaster Recovery Funding Arrangements (DRFA) measures (Category B), states and
territories can claim the cost of restoring damaged essential public assets to at least their pre-
disaster function. To determine its pre-disaster function, states must consider the condition of the
essential public asset and its level of functionality (or utility) prior to the disaster. The assistance also
allows the adoption of alternative approaches to the reconstruction of damaged assets, including
approaches to facilitate improvements in disaster resilience. This allows essential public assets to be
rebuilt to a more resilient standard through:
• applying modern building, design, and construction standards
• using contemporary construction methodologies and building materials
• adopting a more appropriate type of asset, rather than a like-for-like replacement
• relocating damaged assets to a more suitable site.
States and territories are also able to request the Prime Minister’s agreement to cost-share, under
the DRFA, betterment works to essential public assets following major disasters as exceptional
assistance (Category D). The Australian Government is committed to supporting jurisdictions to build
back essential public assets to a more resilient condition, where this is appropriate, and has agreed
to cost-share a number of betterment programs under Category C/D of the DRFA for Queensland,
New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Western Australia. These programs are intended to
support rebuilding and recovery, with a resilience component, with the goal to mitigate risk against
future disaster events and their costs. An ‘off-the-shelf’ recovery package for infrastructure
betterment has been developed to support state and territory governments in preparing and lodging
a Category D betterment application.
14
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 11:
3.201 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government investigate options to include
flexibility to fund preparedness measures through Disaster Recovery Funding Arrangements to
assist in mitigating against future disaster events.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The purpose of the DRFA is to support states and territories to assist with providing certain relief and
recovery assistance measures to support impacted individuals and communities to recover from a
disaster. While the DRFA is not specifically designed to fund preparedness, a central principle of the
DRFA is that relief and recovery assistance should be used to complement and promote disaster
resilience outcomes for affected individuals and communities.
In addition to improving the resilience and betterment of essential public asset reconstruction, as
outlined in response to Recommendation 10, the DRFA also provides support with the costs of
undertaking Counter Disaster Operations. These activities, undertaken either immediately prior,
during or after a disaster to protect individuals and/or communities, may include search and rescue
or evacuations of threatened/affected individuals, sandbagging or construction of temporary levees,
fire suppression activities, rapid assessments, and establishing temporary access routes.
Additionally, where a state or territory is claiming the costs of reconstructing a damaged essential
public asset under Category B of the DRFA, cost efficiencies may be realised where the actual cost of
reconstructing the essential public asset is less than the established estimated reconstruction cost.
Where efficiencies are realised, the DRFA outlines that states and territories can redirect these
efficiencies towards natural disaster mitigation projects in order to reduce or eliminate future risk
from natural hazards. This may include projects that focus on:
• planning and regulations –assessing, documenting and communicating community risks,
limiting or prohibiting development in high-risk areas, integrating hazard mitigation into
planning
• infrastructure projects – protection of existing public infrastructure, post-disaster mitigation
activities
• education and awareness – increased hazard and risk education awareness.
Separate to the DRFA, the Australian Government has established the Disaster Ready Fund (DRF)
which will provide up to $200 million per year from 2023-24 to 2027-28 for disaster resilience and
risk reduction initiatives across Australia. Both infrastructure and systemic risk reduction projects
were eligible under Round One and Two of the DRF. Round One delivered $200 million in 2023-24 to
185 projects across Australia. Round Two delivered $200 million in 2024-25 for 171 projects across
Australia. Round Three has a particular focus on larger infrastructure projects that deliver long-term
risk reduction and resilience benefits through a dedicated funding stream. Round Three outcomes
were announced on 17 November 2025. This provides an additional $200 million in funding through
2025-26 for 96 projects in every state and territory. Of the 96 projects, 41 are infrastructure
projects. Round Four is currently in the design phase with program information and requirements
expected to be released by mid 2026.
DRF project proposals have sought investment in grey infrastructure, green-blue infrastructure
(including nature-based solutions), social infrastructure, natural hazard monitoring infrastructure,
and development of infrastructure business cases and feasibility studies. Examples include, but are
not limited to: the construction of flood levees, fire breaks or cyclone shelters, business cases to
develop accessible infrastructure and investigation, planning and design of infrastructure to resolve
15
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
emerging risks, sand nourishment on vulnerable coastlines, tsunami modelling, bushfire warning
systems, construction of places for community support or to address community needs in time of
disaster.
16
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 12:
3.202 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government’s National Emergency
Management Agency increase awareness and education around betterment options under
Category B Disaster Recovery Funding Arrangements.
The Australian Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
Together with states and territories, NEMA delivered a series of targeted outreach events
throughout 2023 through a national DRFA Roadshow. The purpose of this engagement was to
ensure local governments had a greater understanding of the application and requirements of the
DRFA and to enhance partnerships across all levels of government. These sessions were tailored,
reflecting that each jurisdiction has its own disaster recovery arrangements and capability maturity
and relationships with local governments. The DRFA Roadshows covered:
• relief measures available, with a focus on roads and other essential public asset
reconstruction (including betterment), and activation processes
• eligibility, evidentiary requirements, and the DRFA claims acquittal and assurance processes
including through the use of practical case scenarios.
The Roadshows provided an opportunity for local councils to raise key concerns and ask questions of
DRFA experts in both the Australian Government and relevant state government departments. The
national DRFA Roadshow delivered 31 sessions across every jurisdiction, attended by more than
1100 participants from over 330 local governments and delivery agencies. The key themes that
emerged throughout the Roadshow engagements were:
• the need for a timely flow of funding (including Australian Government DRFA funding) to
councils to support recovery
• recognition of the need for increased funding to local governments, including the minimum
funding required to maintain Australia’s extensive road networks
• the need for additional engagement across all levels of government to enhance
understanding of DRFA settings, roles and responsibilities
• increased investment in resilient infrastructure or betterment of existing infrastructure.
An evaluation of the DRFA Roadshow sessions demonstrated high levels of engagement by all
stakeholders and recommendations for continued engagement and or tailored/targeted sessions.
NEMA continues to engage with state and local governments to build and mature the understanding
of the DRFA, including through identifying opportunities for targeted engagement, such as preparing
for future high-risk weather seasons.
NEMA continues to engage with state and local governments to build and mature the understanding
of the DRFA. Follow up Roadshow sessions were conducted with a number of states in 2024, and as
requested by states in 2025. These sessions were tailored to the needs of the states and their local
councils. Engagement with states continues on an ongoing basis.
Future outreach will also seek to address the outcomes of the multiple relevant reviews being
undertaken, while also seeking to further strengthen stakeholder relationships and further aid the
effective utilisation of the DRFA to support recovery (and resilience) activities.
17
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 13:
3.205 The Committee recommends that the National Emergency Management Ministers’ Meeting
include infrastructure resilience on its agenda to foster cross-agency collaboration and
coordination across the Australian Government.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
Strengthening consideration of natural hazard risk reduction and resilience, including infrastructure
resilience, is a key priority for members of the National Emergency Management Ministers’ Meeting
(NEMMM). However, it is recognised that primary portfolio responsibility for infrastructure
resilience sits outside the portfolio responsibilities of NEMMM members in all jurisdictions, requiring
engagement and cooperation with planning, building and infrastructure ministers.
18
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 14:
3.209 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government encourage its state and territory
counterparts to work with local governments to facilitate local council collectives to deliver
road asset management projects and to guide voluntary road user agreement negotiations
with industry.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government is committed to working in partnership with local, state and territory
governments to deliver services and build infrastructure that delivers benefits and supports jobs in
local communities.
The Australian Government notes that while councils have responsibility for the majority of roads in
Australia, they are constrained by limited resources. State and territory governments are best placed
to assist local councils where necessary. The Australian Government will use mechanisms such as the
FFAS and existing forums with states and territories to encourage closer cross-jurisdictional
collaboration. It is expected the Annual Infrastructure Plans developed by the states and territories
under the FFAS will reflect local government road asset priorities within their jurisdictions.
In November 2023, the Australian Government announced major funding increases and changes to
local roads investment programs to benefit local governments. This funding will give councils the
stability and funding certainty to establish and grow local resources to tackle the challenges of
upgrading and maintaining regional road networks, which have been heavily impacted by severe
weather in recent years. More funding for local roads will enhance safety and connectivity for
communities, especially in regional Australia.
As referenced in the response to Recommendation 6, this funding included Roads to Recovery
Program funding, which is increasing to $1 billion annually from 2027-28, supporting local
governments and unincorporated areas responsible for local road infrastructure nationwide.
Since 2019 the Australian Government has also funded the Strategic Local Government Asset
Assessment Project (SLGAAP) to assist local government road managers undertake capacity
assessments of bridges and culverts on key routes for heavy vehicles. The initiative provides
information on safe operating limits of road infrastructure and facilitates safe access for heavy
vehicles, informing long-term asset management plans.
19
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 15:
4.155 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government collaborate with state and
territory governments, the scientific community, and industry to revise national road
infrastructure design and construction standards, allowing for:
– state and territory and place-based resilience requirements
– contemporary and adaptive engineering and design principles
– innovative and recycled technologies
– local government assistance to access innovative technologies and recycled materials
– consideration and identification of climate resilient corridors, including through the
Australian Government’s Bureau of Infrastructure and Transport and Research Economics’
Road and Rail Supply Chain Resilience Review.
It is expected that the standards would be informed by Austroads Guides, National Transport
Research Organisation research, Bureau of Meteorology and Commonwealth Scientific and
Industrial Research Organisation research, and industry standards.
The Australian Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
The Australian Government is collaborating with relevant stakeholders to include consideration of
resilience, innovative technologies and greenhouse gas emissions in infrastructure investment.
In December 2022, the National Cabinet tasked Planning Ministers from all jurisdictions with
developing a framework and guidance on nationally agreed principles for disaster and climate risk
considerations in land use planning. This work is ongoing.
The Australian Government partnered with Engineers Australia to update the climate change
considerations chapter of the Australian Rainfall and Runoff (ARR) Guidelines. The updated chapter,
released in August 2024, will assist stakeholders to identify and manage flood risks to infrastructure,
including roads, based on the latest climate science.
The Australian Government supports the use of recycled products in major infrastructure projects,
such as road construction and maintenance, complementing the Australian Government's circular
economy and net zero goals. For example, the Tyre Product Stewardship Scheme is an Australian
Government accredited, industry-led voluntary scheme, managed by Tyre Stewardship Australia. The
scheme has delivered a range of projects - including research and trials - to identify practical
applications for tyre derived products in roads.
The Austroads research program has also undertaken considerable research on use of recycled
materials and innovative techniques, and the findings have been and will be incorporated into
Austroads Guides so all road practitioners, including local government road practitioners, can be
equipped with advice on applying these innovative techniques.
Additionally, Austroads has worked with RMIT University on a project with 10 local governments and
supported by the Australian Research Council on incorporating recycled plastic from consumer and
industrial waste, including stubborn soft plastics, into asphalt as a performance enhancer.
Phase One of the Road and Rail Supply Chain Resilience Review assessed the vulnerability of 65
critical road and rail freight routes. Phase One highlighted a number of potential opportunities to
address gaps in data and build upon existing research, leverage infrastructure investment, and
develop a nationally coordinated approach to road and rail resilience to risk. The refreshed National
Freight and Supply Chain Strategy includes actions in response to the Phase One findings.
20
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Infrastructure Australia released the Embodied Carbon Projections for Australian Infrastructure and
Buildings report in July 2024, which identifies an opportunity to drive national alignment on low-
carbon expectations through performance-based standards and specifications. The report was
developed in consultation with state and territory governments, CSIRO and industry stakeholders.
All infrastructure proposals seeking more than $250 million in Australian Government funding being
submitted to Infrastructure Australia must consider their impact on greenhouse gas emissions.
Project cost benefit analyses must measure emissions and use the National Carbon Values to assess
the impact of greenhouse gas emissions. Further detail is available in the Guide to assessing
greenhouse gas emissions. Where practical the National Carbon Values are also expected to be
applied to projects with a government contribution exceeding $100 million, regardless of
jurisdiction. The FFAS includes Key Performance Indicators on decarbonisation, which will provide
data on business cases using the National Carbon Values.
21
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 16:
4.157 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government strengthen procurement
requirements under the new Federation Funding Agreement Schedule on transport
infrastructure for state and territory government co-funded project proposals to incorporate
resilience design, minimum road construction requirements, and performance specifications
to enable sustainable long-term resilience over an asset’s lifecycle.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
Under the new FFAS, the Australian Government and states and territories share a responsibility to
invest in the whole-of-life resilience of land transport infrastructure to mitigate climate and disaster
risks, thereby improving freight and supply chain resilience. Projects funded under the FFAS will align
with the parties’ shared strategic themes, which include productivity and resilience; liveability; and
sustainability. States and territories will also work towards optimising their procurement practices to
deliver wider economic, social, and environmental benefits.
The FFAS and associated administrative guidelines also include a requirement for road projects
funded under the agreement to be designed in accordance with relevant design guidelines as a
minimum.
22
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 17:
4.159 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government strengthen procurement project
specifications under the new Federation Funding Agreements Schedule for state and territory
government co-funded project proposals to include minimum or preferred requirements for
the use of innovative road asset technologies and recyclable materials and methodologies to
enable sustainable long-term asset resilience and support a circular economy.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
In November 2023, Australia's environment ministers endorsed a national framework for recycled
content traceability. This framework can support procurement officers involved in infrastructure
projects such as roads to source genuine, fit-for-purpose recycled material for use. It can also
support the tracking and reporting of recycled content used in infrastructure projects more
generally.
Under the FFAS, states and territories will work towards optimising their procurement practices to
enhance the recycled content in transport infrastructure to support Australia's transition to a
circular economy by 2030, and reduce embodied carbon in transport infrastructure in line with
Australia's net zero commitments. These procurement practices should also deliver value for money,
and consider the opportunities and market capabilities in their respective jurisdictions.
23
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 18:
4.161 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with its state and territory
counterparts and industry to raise awareness and education of innovative technologies and
recyclable materials and construction methods to support road asset infrastructure
sustainability and support a circular economy.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
The Australian Government has been working to raise awareness of the opportunities for use of
recycled materials in infrastructure, by:
• producing videos that showcase Australian companies making products containing recycled
materials
• partnering with the Infrastructure Sustainability Council to pilot a credit that will reward the
use of recycled content under their Infrastructure Sustainability Rating Scheme
• delivering through Infrastructure Australia the 2022 Replacement Materials Report which
highlights opportunities to use recycled materials in road infrastructure
• delivering through Infrastructure Australia the 2024 Embodied Carbon Projections for
Australian Infrastructure and Buildings report, which identifies opportunities and practical
decarbonisation strategies including recycled and low carbon materials
• engaging the Australian Roads Research Board to develop best practice advice on recycled
material use in road and rail projects.
The Australian Government is also developing a verified brand for recycled content products,
‘ReMade in Australia’. The brand will be implemented as a certification trade mark and administered
by a third-party licencing body. While the rules for the scheme are still being developed, it is
expected that construction projects (that meet the eligibility requirements) will be able to
participate with the brand.
The Recycling Modernisation Fund (RMF) is a national initiative that is expanding Australia’s capacity
to sort, process and remanufacture glass, plastic, tyres, paper and cardboard. The Australian
Government is investing $250 million in new and upgraded recycling infrastructure through the RMF.
As part of this investment, the RMF has provided funding to projects which would enable the
construction of roads from recycled materials.
24
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 19:
4.164 The Committee recommends all levels of Government to undertake a proactive approach to
build and strengthen their data skills and capabilities to inform better decisions, particularly
on road conditions and accidents.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
The Australian Government is improving the sharing, transparency and consistency of national road
safety data through the following measures:
• A Data Sharing Agreement (DSA) for the exchange of road safety data was agreed by all
governments on 12 April 2024 to help inform a comprehensive view of where and when
fatalities and serious injuries are occurring.
• The Australian Government will also work to improve data sharing with the state and
territory governments through the FFAS.
• The 2024-25 Budget included an investment of $21 million in the National Road Safety Data
Hub (the Hub). This investment will ensure that the Hub can be used effectively by everyone,
including decision makers, and will continue the work of harmonising the important data
provided by state and territories. A clear picture, underpinned by data, about where best to
target road safety funding will save lives and ensure investment in projects which will make
the biggest difference.
• Through the National Road Safety Action Plan 2023-25, the Australian Government
committed to developing a National Data Collection and Reporting Framework (Framework)
and National Road Safety Dataset (NRSD). The Framework and NRSD focus and prioritise
data collection and reporting efforts nationally, to inform future planning and policy
development for road safety in Australia for road safety practitioners, researchers and
governments.
In addition to these measures, the Australian Government chairs the Road Safety Data Working
Group (RSDWG), which provides a forum for Australian, state and territory government officials to
collaborate and focus on the delivery of intergovernmental road safety data objectives and
commitments, as articulated in the National Road Safety Strategy 2021-30 and its accompanying
Action Plans.
As referenced in the response to Recommendation 14, the Australian Government is also funding
SLGAAP, which supports local government road managers understand the condition and capacity of
their local bridge assets. SLGAAP phase three will focus on supporting the collection of bridge asset
data towards the establishment of the National Automated Access System (NAAS). The NAAS is
intended to improve productivity and enable safe access by significantly reducing case-by-case
permits for heavy vehicle access.
25
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 20:
4.165 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with state, territory and
local governments and road agencies, including Austroads and the National Transport
Research Organisation, to address existing road asset data gaps by developing a
comprehensive understanding of the road network condition and standardised road asset
dataset, with agreement on the following:
• a common definition of road asset data
• a consistent format across road asset data collection and storage.
The Australian Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
Under the FFAS, the Australian, state and territory governments will support a process of continuous
improvement in setting outcomes-based performance indicators and reporting. Key Performance
Indicators will enable the assessment of outcomes achieved in the areas of productivity and
resilience, liveability and sustainability, with a focus on the NLTN. The states and territories will
provide a Road Performance Data Report annually, including agreed data on road condition and
usage, as well as associated maintenance expenditure.
The Road Asset Data Standard compiled by Austroads provides consistent definitions, formats and
counting rules for key road asset condition, use and related financial information. The Austroads
Road Asset Data Standards are intended to:
• help governments comparatively and consistently assess their road condition, including after
severe weather events
• use terms that are already widely used by road agencies
• support more innovative data collection
• help support decision making on road investment and expenditure through consistent asset
data.
26
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 21:
4.167 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government encourage state and territory
governments to work with local governments to develop skills-based networks across council
collectives to support asset management training and education to address workforce skills
shortages across road construction and maintenance.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
Local Government Associations in each state and the Northern Territory have been established
under a federation type structure for which the Australian Local Government Association (ALGA)
represents local government at the national level.
Local government associations provide a voice for local government and leadership for the sector.
They also provide a suite of resources, including training and support for asset management for
member council employees within their jurisdictions.
ALGA is an ex-officio member of the Local Government Ministers Forum (LGMF), which provides a
forum for Commonwealth, state and territory local government ministers to forge collaborative
actions, underpinned by the shared understanding of challenges impacting local governments across
the nation. Through the LGMF the Australian Government facilitates and encourages state and
territory governments to work collaboratively with ALGA to identify and respond to issues affecting
local government including challenges such as workforce skills shortages.
Australia’s Vocational Education and Training (VET) system is designed to support a range of national
needs and priorities. With strong industry leadership, Australia’s VET sector has the scale and reach
to respond to whole of economy challenges and opportunities and plays a critical role in supporting
Australians to access secure, well-paid jobs.
The Australian Government has committed to delivering a collaborative, tripartite VET sector that
brings employers, unions and Governments together to find solutions to skills and workforce
challenges.
Jobs and Skills Councils (JSCs) have been established to provide industry with a stronger, more
strategic voice to ensure Australia’s VET sector delivers better outcomes for learners and employers.
As a national network of industry owned and industry-led organisations, JSCs provide strategic
leadership in addressing skills and workforce challenges for their sectors, map career pathways
across education sectors, support collaboration between industry and training providers to improve
training and assessment practice and develop contemporary VET training products. JSCs are a key
element of the national VET system architecture.
There are 10 JSCs in the national network providing leadership to address skills and workforce
challenges for their industries. Public Skills Australia (PSA) is the JSC responsible for the Government
Sector including Federal, state and territory, and local government. PSA works collaboratively across
all levels of government to address workforce and skills needs.
PSA also works collaboratively with other JSCs on cross-industry workforce challenges and skills
needs. This cross-collaboration is important given the wide range of occupations and skills required
in local government. BuildSkills Australia is the JSC responsible for the Building, Construction,
Property and Water industries, which includes the civil construction sector.
27
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 22:
6.8 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government strengthen bilateral ties with
New Zealand and Samoa, particularly in relation to disaster management and infrastructure
issues.
The Australian Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
The Australian Government engages regularly with New Zealand on disaster management issues,
including through the Australia-New Zealand Emergency Management Committee (ANZEMC). The
New Zealand National Emergency Management Agency is a permanent member of ANZEMC.
ANZEMC provides nationwide and Trans-Tasman leadership on the management of all hazards
through a natural hazard lens, identifying and responding to emerging issues and longer-term
challenges likely to impact Australia and New Zealand’s capacity to manage all hazards. Bilateral
engagement is further strengthened through the NEMMM, with New Zealand holding a permanent
observer position.
The Australian Government’s National Emergency Management Agency and the New Zealand
National Emergency Management Agency also signed a Memorandum of Cooperation on
19 September 2022, aimed at strengthening the capability of Australia and New Zealand to reduce
risks and respond to disasters.
Australia and New Zealand are working together to build climate resilience in the Pacific region,
including through co-financing the Weather Ready Pacific Initiative. This initiative will help the region
to better forecast and disseminate severe weather warnings through the enhancement of critical
early warning systems. Australia and New Zealand continue to explore joint opportunities to
respond to the threat of climate change in the Pacific, as highlighted in the Australia-New Zealand
Trans-Tasman Roadmap to 2035, and the 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent, for which
Australia and New Zealand are strong supporters.
The Australian Government, through NEMA, works with Samoa in multilateral fora including the
Asia-Pacific Ministerial Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction and the annual Pacific Regional
Disaster Managers Meeting.
Australia and New Zealand are working together alongside other major Pacific infrastructure
financiers, including the World Bank and Asian Development Bank, to implement the Pacific Quality
Infrastructure Principles. Implementing the principles ensures infrastructure projects generate
lasting positive impacts for Pacific Island Countries including by strengthening their resilience to
climate related disasters.
28
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 23:
6.9 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government highlight opportunities for
Australian partnerships with Samoa through Austrade and communicate opportunities for
joint ventures with Australian organisations.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
A core part of Austrade’s role in the Pacific is to support Australian firms in delivering priority
infrastructure across the region, including disaster management projects, and projects that support
climate resilience. This work includes supporting Australian firms with introductions to joint venture
partners as well as local subcontractors and suppliers. These partnerships have and will continue to
prove important to the success of Australian firms in Samoa, with local experience and knowledge
essential to managing conditions, relationships, and ongoing maintenance.
The Legislative Assembly Office project in Apia is proving a promising example of Australia-Samoa
collaboration. Australian firm, Reeves International Pty Ltd, was awarded the construction contract
following open tender with the support of Samoan firms. The new building will be climate resilient
and exhibit best practice in green building technology. Construction commenced in July 2024 and is
expected to be completed in the first half of 2026.
29
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 24:
6.10 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider development
opportunities between the Australian Volunteers Program for Samoa and the Australian
Engineers Association mentoring program and other relevant Australian mentoring programs.
The Australian Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
Engineering has been identified as a skills gap in Samoa by Samoa’s Public Service Commission, and
is one of the priority skills areas for our Australia Awards scholarship program and volunteer
program. The Australian Government takes advice from the Government of Samoa on priority roles
to be supported through the volunteer program. Priority for placements is given to roles in targeted
areas where there are identified skills gaps, that can facilitate transfer of skills and mentoring
opportunities.
30
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 25:
6.13 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider options for a formal
exchange program between the New Zealand National Emergency Management Agency and
the Australian National Emergency Management Agency.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
The Memorandum of Cooperation between the Australian Government’s National Emergency
Management Agency and the New Zealand National Emergency Management Agency provides a
formal framework for information sharing and regular knowledge exchange to foster cooperation in
emergency management.
31
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 26:
6.20 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government develop legislation to provide
for the introduction of measures to protect the rights of insured persons living in areas at risk
of natural hazards, giving consideration to New Zealand’s Natural Hazards Insurance Act 2023.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government is committed to building the resilience of Australian communities to
natural disasters and putting downward pressure on insurance premiums.
The Australian Government established the Insurance Affordability and Natural Hazards Risk
Reduction Taskforce as part of the 2024-25 Budget to develop an integrated, cross-government
approach to minimising the impacts of disaster on the community and help address insurance costs
driven by more frequent and intense weather events. The Government is currently considering the
findings of the Taskforce.
The House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics conducted an inquiry into insurers’
responses to 2022 major flood claims (Flood Failure to Future Fairness Report). The final inquiry
report was released on 18 October 2024, and contained 86 recommendations directed to insurers,
industry bodies, regulators and various levels of government. Recommendations relate to matters
such as claims management, performance reporting, and long-term strategies for flood preparation
and resilience. The Senate Select Committee on the Impact of Climate Risk on Insurance Premiums
and Availability also conducted an inquiry and delivered a report on 26 November 2024. The report
made 8 recommendations. The Government is currently considering its response to the
recommendations of both reports.
In New Zealand, the Toka Tū Ake – Natural Hazards Commission provides the first layer of natural
disaster insurance for residential buildings and some residential land. Consumers’ annual insurance
premiums include a levy, which the Commission uses to cover claims. The Natural Hazards Insurance
Act 2023 introduced a Code of Insured Persons’ Rights from 1 July 2024. Under the Code, insured
persons have the right to have claims managed and settled in a fair and timely manner by the
Commission and its agents.
In Australia, consumers take out insurance with private insurers, who are responsible for handling
and settling claims. Since 1 January 2022, the handling and settling of insurance claims has been
classified as a financial service. Providers must hold an Australian Financial Services (AFS) licence and
are subject to regulatory oversight by the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC).
As AFS licensees, providers of claims handling services must provide the services efficiently,
honestly, and fairly, which includes resolving claims in a timely manner.
The majority of general insurers in Australia are also subject to the Insurance Council of Australia
(ICA)’s voluntary General Insurance Code of Practice, which sets standards such as being open, fair
and honest in the provision of services. The Code of Practice also sets timeframes for insurers to
respond to claims, complaints and requests for information. The ICA is currently undertaking a
process to review the Code of Practice, taking into consideration recommendations made in the
Flood Failure to Future Fairness Report.
Further, as referenced in the response to Recommendation 11, the Australian Government is
providing up to $200 million per year from 2023-24 to 2027-28 through the DRF to improve
Australia’s disaster readiness. The DRF will continue to deliver projects that improve Australia’s
resilience to natural hazards and reduce natural hazard risk. By reducing the risk of damage to
communities, the DRF can also help to place downwards pressure on premiums.
32
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
In the October 2022-23 Budget, the Australian Government announced $22.6 million over four years
to establish the Hazards Insurance Partnership (HIP) initiative to better target mitigation investment,
reduce disaster risk, and improve insurance affordability and availability over time. The HIP is a
collaborative partnership with the insurance industry to create a shared understanding of hazard risk
and appropriate risk reduction measures across Australia.
33
OFFICIAL
