Australian Government response to the
House of Representatives Standing Committee
on the Environment and Energy report:
Not without your approval: a way forward for
nuclear technology in Australia.
MARCH 2026
CONTENTS
Contents ................................................................................................................................... 1
Part I – Overview ...................................................................................................................... 2
Part II – Response to Main Report Recommendations ............................................................. 3
PART I – OVERVIEW
On 13 December 2019, the former House of Representatives Standing Committee on
Environment and Energy presented its report for its inquiry into the prerequisites for nuclear
energy in Australia, titled ‘Not without your approval: A way forward for nuclear technology in
Australia’. The inquiry’s Terms of Reference required the Committee to inquire into and report
on the circumstances and prerequisites for any future government’s consideration of nuclear
energy generation, in the context of Australia’s domestic energy system.
The Australian Government notes the report’s recommendations. However, given the passage
of time since this report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer
appropriate.
The Government also notes the former House Select Committee on Nuclear Energy (the
House Select Committee), which was established 10 October 2024, inquired into and reported
on the consideration of nuclear power generation, including deployment of small modular
reactors in Australia. The full terms of reference for the inquiry and its interim report can be
found on its website at aph.gov.au.
Citing timeliness and cost, the House Select Committee’s interim report reflected limited utility
in pursuing nuclear power, and that it is not currently a viable investment of taxpayer money.
This inquiry lapsed when the House Select Committee ceased to exist at the dissolution of the
House of Representatives on 28 March 2025.
2
PART II – RESPONSE TO MAIN REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider the prospect of
nuclear energy technology as part of its future energy mix by:
a. Prioritising the delivery of affordable and reliable energy while fulfilling Australia’s
international emissions reduction obligations.
b. Adopting a strategic approach to the possibility of entering the nuclear energy
industry which considers:
i. collaborating with, and learning from, international partners with expertise in
nuclear energy;
ii. developing Australia’s own national sovereign capability in nuclear energy
over time; and
iii. procuring next-of-a-kind nuclear reactors only, not first-of-a-kind.
c. Adopting a holistic approach to the possibility of leveraging nuclear technology which
considers:
i. opportunities to create electricity and to participate in other areas of the end-
to-end nuclear fuel cycle;
ii. an expansion of our activities in medical research including pursuit of
applications to treat cancers;
iii. opportunities for other non-energy commercial applications in areas including
health, water, food and agriculture;
iv. likely impacts on jobs, industry and Australia’s economic competitiveness;
and
v. ensuring continued compliance with the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
d. Putting the community at the centre of efforts to progress consideration of nuclear
energy in Australia by:
i. embracing a principle of transparency with the Australian public in all nuclear
related matters;
ii. seeking bipartisanship where possible, especially on major public policy
decisions relating to nuclear energy; and
iii. seeking cooperation from state and local jurisdictions in Australia, where
necessary.
Recommendation 1
The Australian Government notes this recommendation. However, given the passage of time
since this report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.
3
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government undertake a body of work to
progress the understanding of nuclear energy technology by:
a. Commissioning the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation
(ANSTO), or other equivalent expert reviewer, to undertake a technological
assessment on nuclear energy reactors to:
i. produce a list of reactors that are defined under the categories of Generation
I, II, III, III+ and IV;
ii. advise on the technological status of Generation III+ and Generation IV
reactors including small modular reactors;
iii. advise on the feasibility and suitability of Generation III+ and Generation IV
reactors including small modular reactors in the Australian context; and
iv. formulate a framework to be used by Government to monitor the status of
new and emerging nuclear technologies.
b. Commissioning the Productivity Commission, or other equivalent expert reviewer, to
undertake an independent assessment of the economic viability of nuclear energy
generation in the Australian context with account for:
i. both baseload and peak demand;
ii. whole of system costs;
iii. variances in the cost of capital, government subsidies, and other
interventions;
iv. economic costs;
v. environmental outcomes including carbon emissions; and
vi. other alternative energy sources.
c. Commissioning the Australian Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Agency
(ARPANSA), or other equivalent expert reviewer, to lead and coordinate a whole-of-
government assessment that identifies the major requirements that would need to be
in place before Australia was ready to adopt nuclear energy, particularly:
i. waste management;
ii. health and safety;
iii. workforce capability;
iv. security; and
v. governance issues.
d. Commissioning an expert body to manage an independent community engagement
program that would educate and inform Australians on nuclear technology, answer
their queries and hear their views.
Recommendation 2
The Australian Government notes this recommendation. However, given the passage of time
since this report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government allow partial and conditional
consideration of nuclear energy technology by:
a. maintaining its moratorium on nuclear energy in relation to Generation I, Generation
II and Generation III nuclear technology; and
b. lifting its moratorium on nuclear energy in relation to Generation III+ and Generation
IV nuclear technology including small modular reactors, subject to the results of a
technology assessment (see recommendation 2a) and a commitment to community
consent as a condition of approval (see below).
Further, the Committee recommends that:
c. the Australian Government, in cooperation with relevant state and territory
governments, respect the will of the Australian people by committing to a condition of
approval for any nuclear power or nuclear waste disposal facility being the prior
informed consent of local impacted communities, obtained following extensive
consultation with local residents including local Indigenous peoples.
Recommendation 3
The Australian Government notes this recommendation. However, given the passage of time
since this report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.
5
