Australian Government Response to the
Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and
Trade report:
The pursuit of equality: Inquiry into the rights of women and
children
September 2025
Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends the Australian Government:
• Commit to accelerating action on the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs),
particularly in relation to women and children; and
• Create a roadmap identifying measures which can be taken in order to improve
Australia’s performance in the SDGs and in assisting our strategic partners to meet
goals under the framework.
Response:
The Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
The Australian Government has a number of mutually reinforcing national strategies and
plans to guide and report on government action to advance gender equality, including to
improve Australia’s performance in relation to relevant SDGs.
The Australian Government is committed to genuine outcomes for women and girls in
Australia and has an ambitious domestic gender equality agenda to close the gender gaps in
our community. The Australian Government’s efforts to drive gender equality are
underpinned by Working for Women: A Strategy for Gender Equality (Working for
Women), which was, released on 7 March 2024. Working for Women’s Reporting
Framework tracks and reports on measures to achieve gender equality over time.
The Australian Government’s implementation of the National Plan to End Violence
against Women and Children (2022-2032) (the National Plan) coordinates action across the
Commonwealth and state and territory governments to support victim-survivors and
prevent and respond to gender-based violence (GBV). The Australian Government has
invested over $4 billion from the 2022-23 (October) Budget to the 2025-26 Budget cycle to
support women’s safety initiatives.
Australia is committed to implementing the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
achieving the SDGs. The commitment to step up Australia’s support for the 2030 Agenda
and the SDGs is reflected in Australia’s International Development Policy, released in
August 2023. Australia’s International Development Policy recognises the 2030 Agenda
and the SDGs as the agreed norms, standards and values of the international development
system, including full respect for international law and human rights. With five years left,
Australia recognises the need to advance implementation of the 2030 Agenda to achieve all
the SDGs.
Recognising that over 435 million women and girls are living in extreme poverty, the
2030 Agenda and gender equality are at the heart of Australia’s International Development
Policy, with ambitious targets to improve the lives of women and girls. The Australian
Government is committed to doing its part to achieve all of the SDGs, recognising that our
societies, economies and environments are interlinked and underpinned by human rights
and gender equality.
1
Australia’s International Gender Equality Strategy, released in February 2025, outlines
how the Government is driving gender equality through all tools of foreign policy,
including our international development program. The strategy includes a focus on: work
to end sexual and gender-based violence (SGBV) and advance women’s sexual and
reproductive health and rights, pursue gender responsive peace and security, deliver gender
equitable climate action and humanitarian assistance, promote women’s economic equality
and inclusive trade, and support locally led approaches to women’s leadership.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends the Australian Government, when developing and
implementing the new International Gender Equality Strategy, identify gender-based
violence as a key strategic issue, and identify pathways and mechanisms to support its
regional neighbours in addressing related issues.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Australian Government is committed to responding to, addressing and preventing all
forms of GBV. Australia’s International Development Policy highlights this commitment,
for a stronger, more secure and more inclusive Indo-Pacific region. Regional and bilateral
Development Partnership Plans will be underpinned by robust gender, disability and social
inclusion analyses, including in relation to GBV.
The International Gender Equality Strategy reinforces the commitment to tackling all
forms of GBV, including through increased investment in prevention and response services
in the Indo-Pacific and in crisis and conflict settings. The strategy commits to increasing
support to Pacific crisis centres responding to GBV through a new initiative, Pacific
Strong: Amplifying Action to End Violence against Women and Girls (PAVE). PAVE is a
five-year, AUD 25 million (2026–2031) multi-country initiative to improve access, quality,
and reach of VAWG response services, providing long-term support for the safety and
wellbeing of survivors of violence in the Pacific.
The Government works with partners across Asia and the Pacific to support regional and
bilateral programs focused on essential services for survivors, including access to justice,
violence prevention, assistance to local women’s organisations and evidence-building.
Australia supports bilateral programs in 17 countries in the Indo-Pacific region.
For example, in the Indo Pacific the Government:
• Funds UN Women to deliver projects focused on essential services for survivors,
violence prevention and assistance to local women’s organisations addressing GBV
(AU$22.5 million, 2020-25);
• Supports the UN Population Fund (UNFPA) initiative, kNOwVAWdata, which is
building expertise to strengthen data and research on the prevalence of violence against
women and girls (AU$3 million, 2021-24);
• Works with the Pacific Community (SPC), Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat, European
Union, and UN Women on the Pacific Partnership to End Violence Against Women
and Girls Phase II (Australia’s contribution AU$16 million,
2
2023-27);
• Partners with UNICEF on Empowered and Equal Futures for Girls in Southeast Asia to
make schools safe for girls and strengthen education systems across Southeast Asia to
address GBV and promote positive gender norms (AU$7 million, 2023-27);
• Works alongside the Government of Timor-Leste through the Nabilan program to
reduce the prevalence of violence and ensure services are available to women and
children experiencing violence (AU$20 million, 2022-26);
• Works with the Cambodian Government, UN organisations, civil society and private
sector to ensure essential services are available for people with a disability and women
experiencing GBV (AU$30 million, 2023-28);
• Partners with the Government of Vietnam and United Nations agencies (UNFPA,
UNICEF, UN Women) through the Ending Violence Against Women and Children
program for integrated policies and program to strengthen prevention of and response
to violence against women and children (AU$9.5 million, 2021-25); and
• Supports trusted partners such as UNFPA in Myanmar to deliver GBV and mental
health and psychosocial support services, in collaboration with local organisations to
reach persons in the most vulnerable situations.
In the Pacific, DFAT supports GBV prevention and survivor services, primarily through
Pacific Women Lead and bilateral gender programming. Pacific Women Lead is a five-
year (AU$170 million, 2021-26) investment designed to advance the safety of Pacific
women and girls, in all their diversity, and their equitable sharing of resources,
opportunities and decision-making with men and boys. One of the intended outcomes of
Pacific Women Lead is a reduction in violence against women and children, along with
improved access to quality, comprehensive support services for survivors of GBV,
including in times of disasters. Australia funds GBV services in Fiji, Federated States of
Micronesia, Kiribati, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu.
Through Pacific Women Lead, Australia funds prevention mechanisms. For example, the
Fiji Women’s Crisis Centre provides education and advocacy on gender equality and
prevention of violence, and The Pacific Community coordinates the Regional Working
Group on Domestic Violence Legislation that facilitates exchanges on good practices.
Additionally, Australia supports education, leadership and economic empowerment of
women and girls through programs such as Balance of Power, Pacific Girl and Markets for
Change. Empowering women and girls and tackling discriminatory gender norms are
effective ways to reduce, and eliminate, GBV.
The Attorney-General’s Department works closely with the PNG Department of Justice
and Attorney-General (DJAG) to address a range of law and justice priorities, including
family and sexual violence, and sorcery accusation-related violence. Through the DFAT
funded PNG Institutional Partnership Program, the Attorney-General’s Department has
assisted in law reform efforts to address family and sexual violence, and delivered,
alongside DJAG and other DFAT-funded programs, training to village court officials on
the Family Protection Act and the use of Protection Orders in cases of domestic violence.
The Attorney-General’s Department has also worked closely with DJAG to assist in the
development of a sorcery National Action Plan to combat instances of sorcery accusation-
related violence.
3
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade investigate and
implement strategies to assist in the improvement of legal frameworks and support services
in the Indo-Pacific regarding GBV.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Australian Government is committed to responding to, addressing and preventing
GBV in all its forms. Australia’s International Development Policy highlights this
commitment for a stronger, more secure and more inclusive Indo-Pacific. The
International Gender Equality Strategy reinforce this commitment.
The Government works with partners across Asia and the Pacific to support regional and
bilateral programs focused on essential services for survivors, including access to justice,
violence prevention, assistance to local women’s organisations and evidence-building.
DFAT respects Pacific Island governments’ rights to determine their own legal
frameworks.
Through the Pacific Partnership to End Violence Against Women, Australia is supporting
women’s machineries in Kiribati, Tonga and the Solomon Islands develop comprehensive
national prevention frameworks.
Bilateral investments such as PNG Women Lead (AU$55.2 million, 2021-28) and
Responding to Violence Against Women and Girls in the Solomon Islands
(AUD5.3 million, 2024-27) strengthen the operation and implementation of existing
domestic legal frameworks. PNG Women Lead provides training to police and law
enforcement agencies to strengthen knowledge around recognising, responding to and
handling GBV matters. Under the Responding to Violence Against Women and Girls
programs in the Solomon Islands, the International Women’s Development Agency works
with crisis centres to strengthen reporting quality in-line with SAFENET, a network of
government and non-government organizations to strengthen referral and
coordination of SGBV services in the Solomon Islands
As part of Pacific Women Lead, DFAT supports The Secretariat of the Pacific Community
(SPC) to implement the Progressing Gender Equality in the Pacific program (PGEP).
PGEP addresses the priorities identified in the 2023 Pacific Leaders’ Gender Equality
Declaration and the 2017 Pacific Platform for Action for Gender Equality and Women’s
Human Rights to support Pacific Island governments to adopt policies and legislation that
support gender equality and women’s and girls’ human rights.
Australia, through its development partnership with Indonesia, contributed to the
development of legal and policy reforms to address and prevent GBV in Indonesia.
Australia continues to support the Indonesian government and civil society organisations to
implement the reforms, including work to improve access to justice and essential support
services for GBV victim-survivors.
4
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends the Australian Government:
• Work with state and territory governments in identifying potential gaps in legislation
where acid attacks may not be sufficiently encapsulated, and where improvements can
be made to data collection, risk assessment and screening tools;
• Consider the viability of the introduction of a Commonwealth offence specifically
directed at violence using acid as a weapon, including models which prohibit the sale
of certain corrosive substances and potential amendments to Division 271 of the
Criminal Code 1995 (Cth); and
• Conduct research in relation to the prevalence, nature and impacts of acid attacks in
Australia, particularly in relation to support services and medical assistance.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
Protecting Australians from harm is of the utmost importance to the Australian
Government. Under Australia’s federal system of government, the Commonwealth, states
and territories have different areas of responsibility. States and territories are generally
responsible for crimes against the person including acid attacks which may already
constitute an offence such as serious assaults, grievous bodily harm, torture, attempted
murder and homicide offences.
The Commonwealth regularly engages with states and territories on criminal justice issues
through fora such as the Standing Council of Attorney’s-General and the Police Minister
Council.
The Commonwealth will continue working with states and territories to ensure acid attacks
are sufficiently encapsulated as a form of criminal offending in legislation.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends the Australian Government develop and implement strategies
to counteract orphanage trafficking and tourism, including:
• The adoption of a whole-of-government position explicitly condemning the practice of
orphanage trafficking and orphanage tourism;
• Developing stronger guidance material for travellers in relation to potential risks in
relation to orphanage tourism and volunteering;
• Working with multilateral partners (including via interparliamentary working groups
and the Inter-parliamentary Union) to eliminate orphanage trafficking and tourism;
• Improved regulation and oversight by the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits
Commission in relation to institutions engaging in (or suspected to be engaged in)
orphanage trafficking and tourism; and
• The creation of a specific offence criminalising orphanage trafficking.
Response:
The Government agrees in part to this recommendation.
5
The Australian Government remains strongly committed to addressing all forms of modern
slavery, including by working with multilateral partners to eliminate orphanage trafficking
and related practices of orphanage tourism.
At the 52nd Session of the Human Rights Council (8 March 2023), the Government
delivered a national statement during the Interactive Dialogue with the Special Rapporteur
on the Sale and Sexual Exploitation of Children to reiterate the Government’s commitment
to keep all children safe from exploitation.
The Government will continue to engage with the work of the Special Rapporteur on the
Sale and Sexual Exploitation of Children; the Special Rapporteur on Contemporary Forms
of Slavery; and the Special Rapporteur on Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and
Children—including through Australia’s Ambassador to Counter Modern Slavery, People
Smuggling and Human Trafficking.
Australia also regularly engages with governments and multilateral partners on issues
relating to modern slavery and human trafficking, including through forums such as
Alliance 8.7, in which Australia is currently a governing member. Through DFAT, the
Government also participates in global forums to share volunteering good practice on
issues such as child protection and ‘voluntourism’. Through the Australian Volunteers
Program, the Government will continue to work with partners to draw on the program’s
extensive guidance material concerning safe child volunteering practices.
DFAT will also continue to use Smartraveller communications to highlight to travellers the
risks associated with volunteering at orphanages and existing messaging that the
Government discourages short term unskilled volunteering in orphanages.
The Government does not consider it is necessary to enact a specific offence to criminalise
orphanage trafficking. Australia’s offences for slavery, slavery-like practices and
trafficking in persons in Division 270 and 271 of the Criminal Code (Cth) capture
exploitation or intended exploitation in any industry or setting, including institutional
settings such as orphanages. The offences apply to a broad range of criminal actors.
All offences in Divisions 270 and 271, other than the domestic trafficking offences, apply
to the overseas conduct of Australian citizens, residents and bodies corporate.
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends the Australian Government develop legislation addressed at
the rights of the victims of child sexual abuse material, including:
• The provision of legal pathways to enable victims (including those in overseas
jurisdictions) to seek civil penalties from the perpetrator, including compensation and
restitution; and
• Victim access to a perpetrator notification system from law enforcement agencies.
Response:
The Government agrees in part to this recommendation.
6
The Australian Government is committed to preventing and responding to child sexual
abuse in all settings and supporting victims and survivors. Every child and young person
has the right to be safe from child sexual abuse, and it is our collective responsibility to
protect them.
There are existing legislative and administrative pathways that enable a victim and survivor
of child abuse material to seek compensation or reparations or restitution. For example,
section 21B of the Crimes Act 1914 (Cth) gives a court discretionary power to order an
offender to make reparations to any person who suffers loss or expense ‘by reason of’ the
offence as part of the sentencing proceeding.1 Similar reparations or restitution provisions
exist under state and territory legislation. State and territory victims of crime compensation
schemes may also be available to victims and survivors of child sexual abuse material
offences.
Following the Super for Survivors campaign, the Australian Government has committed to
closing a loophole which allows child sexual abuse offenders to deny victims and survivors
compensation through shielding assets in the superannuation system. The Government will
legislate to allow victims and survivors of child sexual abuse offenders to seek a court
order to access personal and voluntary superannuation contributions made by convicted
offenders to pay court ordered compensation which remains outstanding for 12 months or
more.
The Government will also legislate to allow compensation orders for victims and survivors
of child sexual abuse to survive an offender’s bankruptcy. This will prevent offenders from
being able to avoid compensating victims and survivors by becoming bankrupt.
Under measure 10 of the First Commonwealth Action Plan of the National Strategy to
Prevent and Respond to Child Sexual Abuse 2021-2030, the Attorney-General’s
Department is conducting a scoping study on the availability of civil remedies for victims
of Commonwealth child sexual abuse offences. The findings are expected to inform the
National Strategy’s Second Action Plan.
The Government notes the recommendation for ‘victim access to a perpetrator notification
system from law enforcement agencies’. Further consideration is required of the
international evidence base around such notification systems and how such a scheme could
apply in the Australian context. This includes ensuring that any future perpetrator
notification system would achieve the objective of supporting victims and survivors of
child sexual abuse material.
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommends the Australian Government continue to use international
forums, including bilateral platforms and interparliamentary networks, to emphasise the
need to strengthen laws and protections regarding the human rights of women and children
in conflict and crisis situations. This should include an emphasis on developing and
1 Crimes Act 1914 (Cth), s 21B(1)(b).
7
strengthening responses to issues such as sexual and gender-based violence, children in
exploitative environments and industries, and modern slavery.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Australian Government recognises that conflict and crisis situations heighten the risks
of modern slavery, especially for women and children who remain disproportionately
affected by these crimes. Australia engages with partners in our region and globally to
build awareness and help countries to strengthen their responses to these inhumane crimes
and their drivers.
Across its multilateral and bilateral engagement, DFAT, along with other Commonwealth
departments, will continue to employ every strategy and diplomatic tool at its disposal to
uphold global human rights laws and norms, as they relate to the rights of women and
children, consistent with Australia’s values and interests. The Government will continue to
advocate and negotiate in international fora to uphold and strengthen legal and normative
commitments to respect, protect and fulfill the human rights of women and of children in
all contexts, including in conflict and crisis situations. This includes addressing issues of
SGBV, exploitation and modern slavery. Australia is supporting the establishment of a
global Gender Justice Practitioner Hub which will support practitioners involved in
securing gender justice for victims and survivors of international crimes.
The Attorney-General’s Department leads Australia’s support to the Pacific Islands Law
Officers’ Network (PILON), a regional network of senior Pacific law and justice officials.
Combatting SGBV by strengthening justice system responses and ensuring access to
justice for women and girls is a strategic priority for PILON. The SGBV Working Group
has representation from 17 Pacific Island countries and territories. It has developed best
practice, including model provisions and explanatory text, for supporting vulnerable
witnesses in cases involving SGBV and on the use of victim impact statements. In
November 2023, PILON published Regional Guidelines for Prosecutors and Witnesses
Support Officers to support Vulnerable Witnesses through the Prosecution of SGBV
Offences. These Guidelines, which are being rolled out in several countries in the Pacific,
aim to expedite SGBV prosecutions, reduce re-traumatisation to vulnerable witnesses,
ensure courts hear the best evidence and improve public confidence in reporting SGBV
offences.
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) ensure
that all activities concerning humanitarian, crisis or disaster responses involving
DFAT-funded or - supported entities be:
• Assessed upon application on the basis of local engagement with the community,
including the requirement of a statement by the applicant on the basis of local
engagement, particularly emphasising gender diversity and considerations of the needs
of children;
• Monitored at appropriate intervals to determine outcomes and impact; and
• Reported to the Parliament as part of the DFAT annual report.
8
Response:
The Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
The Australian Government is committed to supporting gender-responsive,
socially-inclusive and locally led humanitarian action. DFAT’s contracts and grant
agreements stipulate that all recipients must comply with DFAT policies on gender
equality, child protection and preventing sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment.
For DFAT procurements, tenderers must demonstrate how they will deliver on Australian
international development priorities, including gender equality, Indigenous participation,
disability, social inclusion, and localisation in delivering the services.
Australia is committed to increasing local engagement; and there are existing and sufficient
controls in place to not require a new process for a statement on local engagement from
partners. Australia’s International Development Performance and Delivery Framework
measures outcomes and impact of humanitarian and crisis response efforts, including
through a three-tier indicator framework, annual investment performance processes, annual
reporting and independent evaluations.
Recommendation 9
The Committee recommends that the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade allocate a
specific portion of Official Development Assistance funding to projects relating to data
collection on issues affecting women and children.
Response:
The Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
DFAT already provides Official Development Assistance funding to projects relating to
data collection, as part of broader programming in response to partner requests.
DFAT works with national governments and other development partners to strengthen the
disaggregation of data, including by gender, disability and other social inclusion markers
and to strengthen the integration of gender analyses within and across development
initiatives, including support for disability-disaggregated data and the disaggregation of
disability data by sex and gender, to ensure gender-responsive approaches to disability.
Australia provides various regional and country level initiatives that contribute to data for
gender equality and related areas, such as the inclusion of people marginalised by disability
and social protection. This includes direct support to the SPC, which manages the Pacific
Statistical Support Program and oversees implementation of the Pacific Roadmap for
Gender Statistics.
Since 2014, the Government has supported partners with the production and utilisation of
data to enable national level policy and program development for gender equality.
This includes support for UN Women’s flagship gender data program Women Count to
close data gaps on priority gender equality issues in the Indo-Pacific region, including on
the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on gender equality and the human rights women
and girls. Australia also funds UNFPA kNOwVAWdata initiative which supports countries
in Asia and the Pacific to undertake international best-practice violence prevalence
9
surveys, covering intimate partner and non-partner violence. The Equality Insights
program, supported by DFAT since 2014 (including its original development as the
Independent Deprivation Measure), is a unique tool for assessing poverty at the individual
level, across multiple dimensions. Australian Government support has evolved alongside
the development and maturation of the tool, with recent work focused on its application in
Tonga and the Solomon Islands.
Australia has also provided funding to UNICEF since 2014 for projects aimed at fostering
the availability and quality of data on children with disabilities, at a global level.
This partnership resulted in the development of tools, including the Child Functioning
Module, the Teacher Version of the Child Functioning Module and the Inclusive Education
Module. Technical assistance was provided to over 60 countries on implementing the Child
Functioning Module increasing the quantity of quality data on children with disabilities.
The information gap on children with disabilities was addressed through analysis and
reports like UNICEF’s Seen, Counted, Included: Using data to shed light on the well-being
of children with disabilities (2021). Quality data are key to eliminating discrimination
against women and children on the basis of disability.
Recommendation 10
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government develop an International
Children’s Development Strategy which outlines:
• Australia’s commitment to upholding the rights of children internationally;
• Reflect commitments made via international legislation and agreements, including the
Sustainable Development Goals;
• Identify mechanisms and approaches in which it can support neighbours and partners in
enhancing their international law obligations and promote the rights of children in local
and regional settings; and
• Provide mechanisms in which children can be involved in policy development on
matters which affect their interests, lives and rights.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government is committed to work in a range of ways to support the needs
of young people in partner countries, including upholding the rights of women and children
internationally, and building on existing connections through education, religious and
cultural institutions, and youth organisations. This is reflected in existing strategies and
policies.
Australia’s International Development Policy acknowledges that there are significant
demographic shifts occurring across the region, bringing unique challenges and
opportunities in different countries, particularly for women, youth and children, such as
access to quality education and health services, and creating sufficient and decent jobs.
Australia assumes its responsibilities for safeguarding and promoting the rights of children
in local and regional settings, including by ensuring robust child protection requirements
10
under the international development program, which also includes reference to
international conventions and Australian domestic legislation.
Australia’s International Development Performance and Delivery Framework includes a
specific education indicator for children, tracking the proportion of children and young
people achieving at least minimum proficiency in reading and mathematics, with
Australian support.
11
