Australian Government response to the
Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee report:
Migration Amendment (Removal and Other Measures) Bill 2024
October 2025
Recommendation Government Response
Committee Majority Report
1 The committee recommends that the Minister considers The Government agreed with these Recommendations.
community impacts when designating a country as a
removal concern country. At the time of the inquiry, the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs
2 The committee recommends that the Senate pass the Bill Committee did not have the benefit of the Minister’s response to the Senate
Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills. While already public, relevant
information from that correspondence has been further included in this
response, for the benefit of the Committee.
In respect to Recommendation 1, the Minister will take into account impacts
on the Australian community when designating a country as a removal
concern country. In practice, the Bill (now Act) requires the Minister to
consult the Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs before
designating a country. As noted in paragraph 71 in the Bill’s explanatory
memorandum, this condition on the exercise of the Minister’s power under
subsection 199F(1) ensures that the Minister’s consideration of the national
interest is appropriately informed by the national and international
implications of the exercise of the power and its effect, including under
proposed section 199G (the bar on visa applications by nationals of a removal
concern country). The Minister would take into account impacts on the
Australian community prior to making such a designation.
Community impacts may also be considered as an element of the national
interest, along with the risks associated with the designation. In practice, this
would occur under paragraph 199F(6)(b) as inserted by the Bill (now Act),
which requires the Minister to outline the reasons for thinking it is in the
national interest to designate a country, before each House of the Parliament.
Recommendation Government Response
Dissenting Report by Coalition Senators
1 Proposed subsection 199B(1) be amended to reflect the The Government agreed with Recommendations 2, 3, 8, 11 and 16
Government’s stated intention that the cohort of ‘removal
pathway non-citizens’ be only those individuals who In response to recommendations 2, 3 and 16 the proposed changes were
have neither legal proceedings (relevant to their dealt with by the Government through the Migration Amendment Bill 2024.
migration status) on foot, nor any pending ministerial That Bill provided a definition of removal pathway non-citizen to be inserted
intervention requests. Alternatively, consideration could into subsection 5(1) of the Migration Act 1958.
be given to amending section 199D(2) to expand the
circumstances in which a removal pathway direction In response to Recommendation 8 the Government moved-amendments in
cannot be given to include circumstances where judicial the Senate to the Migration Amendment (Removal and Other Measures) Bill
review proceedings are still on foot or there is an 2024 (now Act) through sheet no SV105 on 28 November 2024.
outstanding application for Ministerial intervention.
In response to Recommendation 11 the Government moved amendments in
the Senate through sheet no SV105 on 28 November 2024 to provide that
2 Subsection 199B(1)(d) be amended to clarify that the
unless the Minister revokes a designation earlier, that the designation will
power only applies to additional visas issued for non-
sunset after three years.
citizens to maintain lawful status in the community while
making arrangements to depart or be removed from
Australia.
All other recommendations from the dissenting reports by Coalition
Senators, the Australian Greens, and Senator David Pocock were noted
3 Subsection 199B(1)(d) should be amended to specifically
and not adopted.
refer to prescription by regulation under section 504 of
the Migration Act 1958 to remove any doubt that the
exercise of the power will be by way of delegated
legislation subject to disallowance.
4 The Bill be amended to insert a requirement after section
199D(5) that, prior to giving a removal pathway direction
Recommendation Government Response
in relation to any child, the Minister must conduct an
assessment of whether the direction is in the best interests
of the child, as one of the factors to be considered by the
Minister prior to making a removal pathway direction.
5 Consideration be given to amending the Bill to provide
for the additional safeguards proposed by the Scrutiny of
Bills Committee in relation to the Minister’s power to
give removal pathway directions; namely: (a) providing a
minimum time for compliance which would allow a
person to take steps to comply and seek legal advice; and
(b) better delimitation of the directions that may be given
by the Minister.
6 The imposition of mandatory minimum criminal
penalties elevates the need for additional safeguards to be
inserted into the Bill through amendment (including
through the amendments proposed in recommendations 1
to 5 of this report). Proposed amendments to the Bill
should be considered in this context.
7 Within seven days of the end of each month, the Minister
should be required to provide a statement to be tabled in
Parliament in relation to each removal pathway direction
which is given by the Minister during the month with the
detail proposed by the Coalition in its amendments to the
Bill moved in the House of Representatives.
Recommendation Government Response
8 The power to declare a country as a removal concern
country be redrafted to require the Minister to consider a
set of factors which must be considered prior to making a
designation (e.g. those factors required to be included
under the analogous UK legislation), including the
potential impact on Australian diaspora communities of
making such a declaration.
9 The Minister and/or the PJCIS be required to review the
decision to declare a country as a removal concern
country on a regular basis and be required to table in both
House of Parliament the reasons why continued
designation of a country as a removal concern country is
justified.
10 The reasons for a declaration of a country as a removal
concern country not being subject to disallowance should
be clearly explained in the Explanatory Memorandum. If
a declaration is not subject to disallowance that elevates
the need for further details to be provided in the Bill with
respect to the circumstances in which a declaration would
be made (refer to Recommendation 9).
11 Any declaration of a country as a removal concern
country should be subject to sunsetting after three years.
12 That the exemptions under section 199G(2) from the
prohibition on applying for visas should be expanded to
include: parents of independent children, grandparents,
Recommendation Government Response
siblings and dependent persons (to take into account non-
western kinship systems as suggested by the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights).
13 That Government should:
• undertake a comprehensive review of all
mitigating measures (and resourcing requirements
for such measures) beyond strategic
communications that may be required to mitigate
any potential ‘pull factors’ that may arise from the
Bill; and
• commit to agreeing to implement such measures
in the event the Bill is passed to ensure that any
‘pull factors’ are mitigated to the full extent
practical.
14 The Government should restore the Operation Sovereign
Borders framework in full by: (a) reinstating temporary
protection visas; (b) reversing the budget cuts to border
protection; and (c) restoring maritime patrols and aerial
surveillance levels to at least the levels in 2020-21.
15 A statutory review should be undertaken with respect to
the exercise of the powers under the Bill after five years
of operation. The review should be open to public
submissions.
Recommendation Government Response
16 It is recommended that a note to drafting be added to
proposed section 199B to clarify the Department’s
intention not to capture other holders of Subclass 050
(Bridging) General Visas.
17 Given the nature of the powers granted to the Minister
under the Bill, it is recommended that the Bill be
amended as detailed in this report to provide additional
safeguards.
Dissenting Report by the Australian Greens
1 This Bill should be rejected in full.
Dissenting Report by Senator David Pocock
1 That the Senate does not pass the Bill
2 That the Government gives access to an expedited re-
application process to everyone who has been subjected
to the ‘Fast Track system’, including access to merits
review in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal or the
proposed future Administrative Review Tribunal.
3 That all future refugee status determinations are
conducted in a fast, robust and fair manner with access to
both merits and judicial review, and that applicants are
not subjected to protracted processing times that
contribute to barriers to their removal should they be
found not to be owed protection.
4 That the Bill is amended to ensure that, if an applicant
has not been eligible for review by the Administrative
Recommendation Government Response
Review Tribunal or the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
(for example, if they are a Fast Track applicant or a
transitory person), they may not be given a removal
pathway direction
5 Should the Senate choose not to follow these primary
recommendations, and passes the Bill, I make the
following recommendations:
That the Bill is amended to ensure that where a person’s
matter is subject to judicial review or where they have a
pending request for ministerial intervention due to
compelling and compassionate circumstances, they may
not be given a removal pathway direction
6 That the Bill is amended to ensure that the immediate
family of Australian citizens, permanent residents and
stateless persons cannot be given a removal pathway
direction
7 That the Bill is amended to delete proposed paragraphs
199B(1)(c) and 199B(1)(d), to remove Bridging Visa E
holders and the holders of additional classes of visas that
may be prescribed in the future from the meaning of
removal pathway non-citizen
8 That the Bill is amended to remove the proposed
subsection 199E(2) relating to a 12-months mandatory
minimum sentence
Recommendation Government Response
9 That the Bill is amended to remove the proposed
subsection 199E(4), including paragraphs (a), (b) and (c),
relating to exceptions to what is considered a ‘reasonable
excuse’.
10 That the Bill is amended to remove items 3–9 in
Schedule 2, relating to the power to revisit protection
claims.
11 That the Bill is amended to ensure that proposed section
199G ‘Visa applications by certain nationals of a removal
concern country’ may only be applied to government
officials of a removal concern country and their
immediate family members

