Australian Government response to the
Senate Committee Economics report:
Inquiry into Treasury Laws Amendment (Mergers and
Acquisitions Reform) Bill 2024
March 2026
Introduction
This Treasury Laws Amendment (Mergers and Acquisitions Reform) Bill 2024 includes a package of
reforms to modernise Australia’s merger review framework. The Bill replaces Australia’s current
approach to merger control with a faster, stronger, simpler, targeted, more transparent and
streamlined system that better addresses anti-competitive mergers and acquisitions.
The Bill:
• introduces a requirement for certain acquisitions to be notified to the Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission (ACCC) for assessment prior to being put into effect, with penalties to
support compliance
• establishes a new administrative system where the ACCC is the first instance decision maker on
whether the acquisition is likely to substantially lessen competition in a market, or (following the
competition assessment) whether likely public benefits would outweigh the public detriments
• streamlines the assessment of mergers and acquisitions with clear timelines
• promotes integrity and good decision-making by providing for review of ACCC decisions by the
Tribunal
• enhances transparency through the establishment of a public register of notified acquisitions and
other procedural safeguards
• provides that fees are payable for certain actions under the reforms.
The Bill passed both Houses on 28 November 2024 and received Royal Assent on 10 December 2024
as the Treasury Laws Amendment (Mergers and Acquisitions Reform) Act 2024.
The Government thanks the Senate Economics Legislation Committee for its inquiry into the Bill, and
thanks the organisations and individuals who made submissions to the inquiry and participated in the
public hearing.
The Government’s responses to the recommendations made in the Committee’s final report are
provided below. In line with the guidelines on Government responses, recommendations that a bill or
bills be passed, rejected, or amended have not been responded to. This includes the Committee’s
recommendation in the Main Report that the Senate pass the Bill, recommendation 1 in the Coalition
Senators' additional comments and recommendation 1 in the Greens Senators' additional comments.
Introduction | 1
Response to the recommendations
Coalition Senators' additional comments
Recommendation 2
An expert implementation advisory panel be established, with the Competition Taskforce Advisory
Panel and key submitters to this inquiry including the Business Council of Australia and the
Technology Council of Australia among those represented.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
During the transition period (1 July–31 December 2025), Treasury worked closely with the
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC), the Business Council of Australia
(BCA), the Law Council of Australia (LCA) and other key stakeholders, holding monthly meetings to
capture emerging business experiences with the merger reform.
In 2025, the ACCC also renewed and expanded its Performance Consultative Committee to advise
on the ACCC’s merger review functions as well as the broad range of the ACCC’s responsibilities.1
The Performance Consultative Committee consists of a range of stakeholders including consumer,
business, and legal representatives.2 The Performance Consultative Committee will provide
feedback on ACCC initiatives and a forum for exchange of perspectives on key issues, including
those related to the implementation of the new merger system.
Recommendation 3
Treasury and ACCC officials make themselves available to provide a private briefing to the Senate
Economics Committee on merger regime implementation progress on a quarterly basis.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
Relevant Treasury and ACCC officials have and will continue to be available to provide updates on
merger reform implementation progress as part of regular Parliamentary scrutiny processes
(including Senate Estimates).
Recommendation 4
Serious consideration be given to the implementation proposals highlighted by the Business
Council of Australia that have not yet been adopted, namely the quarterly publication of key
performance indicators on merger timelines and the publication of s155 notices data.
1 ACCC, Statement of Goals for Merger Reform Implementation, ACCC, Australian Government, 10 October 2024
2 ACCC, ACCC Performance Consultative Committee, ACCC website
2 | Response to the recommendations
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The ACCC published a Statement of Goals for Merger Reform Implementation3 on 10 October
2024.
The ACCC will include a summary of key performance indicators relating to merger timelines as
part of annual reporting on the ACCC’s mergers work, and has committed to reporting on the use
of extension powers related to its information gathering powers under section 155 of the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010.4
The ACCC’s acquisition register publishes timelines and its use of timeline extension powers for
merger notifications.
3 ACCC, Statement of Goals for Merger Reform Implementation, ACCC, Australian Government, 10 October 2024
4 Evidence to Senate Economics Legislation Committee, Parliament of Australia, Canberra, 30 October 2024,
16-17 (Gina Cass-Gottlieb, ACCC Chair).
Response to the recommendations | 3
Greens Senators' Additional Comments
Recommendation 2
The Government should prioritise reforms that would make markets more competitive and bring
down the cost of essential goods and services, including by introducing economy-wide divestiture
powers to allow for corporations that have misused their market power to be broken up.
Australian Government response
The Government does not support this recommendation.
The Government has prioritised reforms that will make our economy more competitive and
productive, including the biggest reform to the merger control system in 50 years.
Divestiture is only available as a remedy in limited cases in Australia: to unwind mergers, to
dispose of assets in a foreign investment context, or as a last resort to deal with aggravated
causes of abuse of market power in electricity markets.
As past competition reviews have found, introducing divestiture powers as a remedy for breaches
of misuse of market power provisions carries more risks than benefits and would likely result in
significant adverse economic and legal consequences. The Hilmer (1993), Dawson (2003) and
Harper (2015) reviews did not recommend divestiture as a remedy to address market power
concerns.
As part of the Treasury Laws Amendment (Mergers and Acquisitions Reform) Act 2024, the
Government passed legislation to introduce significant merger reforms to promote competition
and deliver better outcomes for consumers, businesses and the economy. These are the biggest
reforms to the merger control system in 50 years, making it stronger, faster, simpler, more
targeted and more transparent. The ACCC will have stronger powers to identify and scrutinise
transactions that pose a risk to competition before they occur.
4 | Response to the recommendations
