












2022-2023
THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SENATE
IDENTITY VERIFICATION SERVICES BILL 2023
IDENTITY VERIFICATION SERVICES (CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS) BILL 2023
SUPPLEMENTARY EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM
Amendments to be Moved on Behalf of the Government
(Circulated by authority of the
Attorney-General, the Hon Mark Dreyfus KC MP)
GLOSSARY
The following abbreviations and acronyms are used throughout this Explanatory Memorandum.
Abbreviation Definition
AHRC Act Australian Human Rights Commission 1986 (Cth)
APP Australian Privacy Principle
Bill Identity Verification Services Bill 2023
Consequential Amendments Bill Identity Verification Services (Consequential Amendments)
Bill 2023
Crimes Act Crimes Act 1914
Criminal Code Criminal Code Act 1995
Department the department responsible for administering the Act to be
established by the Bill
DVS Document Verification Service
FIS Face Identification Service
FVS Face Verification Service
ICCPR International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
Information Commissioner Australian Information Commissioner
NACC National Anti-Corruption Commission
NDLFRS National Drivers Licence Facial Recognition Solution
OAIC Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
Ombudsman Act Ombudsman Act 1976
Privacy Act Privacy Act 1988
Senate Committee Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional
Affairs Legislation Committee
2
AMENDMENTS TO THE IDENTITY VERIFICATION SERVICES BILL 2023 AND
IDENTITY VERIFICATION SERVICES (CONSEQUENTIAL AMENDMENTS)
BILL 2023 (Government)
GENERAL OUTLINE
1. The purpose of the amendments to the Identity Verification Services Bill 2023 is to implement the
Government’s response to recommendations from the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs
Legislation Committee’s inquiry into the Bill and the Identity Verification Services
(Consequential Amendments) Bill. The Senate Committee handed down the report of its inquiry
on 9 November 2023. The amendments will also address issues raised by stakeholders, including
during the Committee’s inquiry.
2. The amendments will enhance existing privacy safeguards, oversight and transparency
arrangements, including by clarifying the application of the Privacy Act and the role of the
Information Commissioner, by:
• ensuring that the annual assessment at clause 40 aligns with, and leverages, the
Information Commissioner’s existing assessment functions and powers in the Privacy Act
• better aligning the requirements that must be set out in participation agreements regarding
data breaches with the requirements in the Notifiable Data Breaches scheme under
Part IIIC of the Privacy Act
• requiring express consent, rather than allowing for implied consent
• specifying the acts or practices of a party to a participation agreement which constitutes
an ‘interference with privacy of the individual’ for the purposes of the Privacy Act
• clarifying that identification information, as defined in clause 6 of the Bill, is personal
information for the purposes of the Privacy Act
• requiring parties to a participation agreement to take reasonable steps to destroy a facial
image that was collected to request the use of the Face Verification Service if it is no
longer required for that purposes, unless the image is a Commonwealth record, or is
required by law or court or tribunal
• ensuring that entrusted persons are authorised to disclose protected information to
Commonwealth integrity agencies, including the Information Commissioner, and the
National Anti-Corruption Commissioner, for the purpose of such agencies exercising a
power or performing a function or duty
• clarifying that Departmental officials and other entrusted persons are prohibited from
recording, disclosing or accessing protected information unless authorised to do so
• requiring the Minister to cause an interim review of the Act to commence as soon as
practicable after 12 months after commencement
• requiring the President of the Australian Human Rights Commission, the Human Rights
Commissioner and the Information Commissioner to be consulted on the interim review
and the existing statutory review at subclause 43(1)
• requiring the Minister to consult with the public and the Information Commissioner
before making rules under the Bill
3
• empowering the Minister to make rules to further delay the requirement for participation
agreements to be in place for the use and provision of the Document Verification Service
• empowering the Minister to make rules to prescribe additional privacy obligations that
must be met by parties to participation agreements
• preventing identification information, obtained for the purpose of requesting or providing
identity verification services, from being used for data profiling, online tracking or
marketing, and
• delaying commencement of the operative provisions of the IVS Bill until rules are made
to support the operation and function of the identity verification services, or 6 months
after the Act receives Royal Assent.
3. The amendments will also empower the Minister to make rules to extend the transitional period
for users of the Document Verification Service to transition onto a participation agreement. The
current period is 12 months, and the Minister will be able to make rules to extend this period by
6 months, allowing for up to a total transitional period of 18 months.
4. The amendment to the Consequential Amendments Bill reflects the amendment to the
commencement of the Bill.
FINANCIAL IMPACT
5. There are no financial impacts associated with these amendments.
4
STATEMENT OF COMPATIBILITY WITH HUMAN RIGHTS
Identity Verification Services Bill 2023
1. The amendments to the Bill are compatible with the human rights and freedoms recognised or
declared in the international instruments listed in section 3 of the Human Rights (Parliamentary
Scrutiny) Act 2011.
Overview of the amendments
2. The purpose of these amendments to the Identity Verification Services Bill 2023 is to enhance the
existing privacy protections and oversight arrangements in the Bill, including by implementing
the Government’s response to recommendations from the Senate Standing Committee on Legal
and Constitutional Affairs’ majority report into the Bill and the Identity Verification Services
(Consequential Amendments) Bill, which was tabled on 9 November 2023.
3. The amendments enhance existing privacy safeguards and oversight arrangements in the Bill,
including by:
• ensuring that the annual assessment at clause 40 aligns with, and leverages, the
Information Commissioner’s existing assessment functions and powers in the Privacy Act
• better aligning the requirements that must be set out in participation agreements regarding
data breaches with the requirements in the Notifiable Data Breaches scheme under
Part IIIC of the Privacy Act
• requiring express consent, rather than allowing for implied consent
• specifying the acts or practices of a party to a participation agreement which constitutes
an ‘interference with privacy of the individual’ for the purposes of the Privacy Act
• clarifying that identification information, as defined in clause 6 of the Bill, is personal
information for the purposes of the Privacy Act
• ensuring that entrusted persons are authorised to disclose protected information to
Commonwealth integrity agencies, including the Information Commissioner, and the
National Anti-Corruption Commissioner, for the purpose of such agencies exercising a
power or performing a function or duty
• requiring an interim review of the Act to commence as soon as practicable after
12 months after commencement, which must consider the adequacy and operation of the
privacy protections, security requirements and obligations, and the penalties for
non-compliance with obligations set out in participation agreements, including whether
civil penalties should apply
• requiring that the Information Commissioner, President of the Australian Human Rights
Commission, and Human Rights Commissioner all be consulted during the course of the
interim review and the 2 year statutory review
• requiring the Minister to consult with the public and the Information Commissioner
before making rules under the Bill, and
• empowering the Minister to make rules to prescribe additional privacy obligations that
must be met by parties to participation agreements
5
• clarifying that entrusted person are prohibited from dealing with protected information
other than for the purposes provided for in the Bill, and
• imposing additional requirements on parties to participation agreements to destroy facial
images collected for the purpose of the FVS where the images are no longer required.
Human rights implications
The right to freedom of expression contained in Article 19 of the ICCPR
4. Article 19 of the ICCPR provides that everyone shall have the right to freedom of expression,
including the freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds.
5. Article 19(3) of the ICCPR provides that this right may be limited on grounds including respect
for the rights of others, or the protection of national security or public order. Any limitations must
be prescribed by legislation and be reasonable, necessary, and proportionate to achieve the desired
purpose.
6. The Bill engages the right to freedom of expression by making it an offence for an entrusted
person (as defined in clause 30(4)) to make a record of, disclose, or access protected information
(see clause 30). The amendments also put beyond doubt that the department responsible for
administering the Act to be established by the Bill is prohibited from recording, disclosing or
accessing identity verification information unless it is in accordance with the objects of the Bill or
in other limited circumstances.
7. The purpose of the limitation on this right is to protect the privacy rights of individuals whose
personal information is used in the provision of identification verification.
8. Entrusted persons will have significant access to protected information, as part of their role and it
is necessary to limit their freedom of expression to disclose, record, or access this protected
information unless authorised. An entrusted person means:
• the Secretary of the department responsible for administering the Act to be established by
the Bill
• APS employees (as defined in section 7 of the Public Service Act 1999) in the Department
• a person whose services are made available to the Department who is:
o an employee of an Agency as defined in the Public Service Act 1999
o or an officer or employee of a State or Territory
o an officer or employee of a government authority (defined in clause 5 to mean an
authority of the Commonwealth, state or territory but not a local government
authority)
o an officer or employee of the government of a foreign country or an authority of a
foreign country,
o or an officer or employee of a public international organisation as defined in
section 70.1 of the Criminal Code (for example multilateral international
organisations such as the World Bank, World Trade Organization and
International Monetary Fund)
• a contractor engaged to provide services to the Department in connection with an
approved identity verification facility (whether the contractor is engaged directly or as a
subcontractor), or
6
• an officer or employee of such a contractor whose duties relate wholly or partly to an
approved identity verification facility.
9. Protected information means any of the following:
• information obtained by an entrusted person from electronic communications to or from
an approved identity verification facility, or from the NDLFRS
• information about the making, content or addressing of an electronic communication to or
from an identity verification facility that was obtained by an entrusted person in their
capacity as an entrusted person
• information about identification information relating to a particular individual held in, or
generated using, the NDLFRS, that was obtained by an entrusted person in their capacity
as an entrusted person, and
• information obtained by an entrusted person in their capacity as an entrusted person that
would enable access to the Document Verification Service hub, Face Matching Services
hub or the NDLFRS.
10. There is a rational connection between the limitation of this right by making it an offence for an
entrusted person to make a record of, disclose or access protected information and the objective of
protecting the privacy rights of individuals about whom protected information may be disclosed.
11. The offences only limit the right to freedom of expression to the extent necessary and reasonable
to protect the rights and reputation of the individuals whose personal information is protected
information.
12. The offences will only apply to entrusted persons, which is limited to officers who are working, in
some capacity, in the Department. It will not apply to any other persons. This is an appropriate
limitation, given such persons will have chosen to take on such roles and received training and
induction about the sensitivity of the information and services that they are dealing with, and the
application of the offences. The offences also only apply to protected information as defined in
subclause 30(4). This is limited to information held or generated using an approved identity
verification facility, or that would enable access to such facilities. This information is sensitive
and needs to be protected in order to ensure the security of the facilities and support the privacy
safeguards set out in the Bill.
13. The limitation on this right through the imposition of this offence is also reasonable, necessary
and proportionate due to the safeguards provided in the Bill and in the introduction of the further
exceptions to the offence at Amendment 26. The exceptions to the offences in subclauses 30(1)
and 30(2) of the Bill are contained in clauses 31 to 35 of the Bill. Amendment 26 would extend
the defences available to entrusted persons by expanding the list of persons to whom entrusted
persons may disclose protected information. Amendment 26 would achieve this by:
• omitting clause 33, which permitted entrusted persons to disclose protected information to
an IGIS official for the purpose of the IGIS official exercising a power, or performing a
duty, as an IGIS official
• omitting clause 34, which permitted entrusted persons to disclose protected information to
an Ombudsman official for the purpose of the Ombudsman official exercising a power, or
performing a function or duty, as an Ombudsman official
7
• inserting a new clause 33 that:
o permits the disclosure of protected information by entrusted persons to a person in
their capacity as an official of a Commonwealth integrity agency for the purpose of
that person exercising a power, or performing a function or duty, namely:
▪ the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security, or a person covered
by subsection 32(1) of the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
Act 1986
▪ the Commonwealth Ombudsman, or another officer within the meaning
of subsection 35(1) of the Ombudsman Act 1976
▪ the Information Commissioner, a member of the staff of the OAIC, or a
consultant engaged under the Australian Information Commissioner Act
2010
▪ the National Anti-Corruption Commissioner or another staff member of
the NACC (within the meaning of the National Anti-Corruption
Commission Act 2022), or
▪ the Inspector of the NACC or a person assisting the Inspector (within the
meaning of the National Anti-Corruption Commission Act 2022), and
o permits an entrusted person to make a record of or access protected information
for the purpose of disclosing the protected information to any of the persons set
out above.
14. Amendment 26 provides that an entrusted person may disclose protected information to the IGIS
or another IGIS official for the purpose of that official exercising a power, or performing a
function or duty in their capacity as an IGIS official. Amendment 26 is intended to enable the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security to obtain information on the use of the identity
verification services by ASIO and ASIS, to assist in carrying out the Inspector-General’s
oversight duties and functions in relation to those agencies as provided in the Inspector-General
of Intelligence and Security Act 1986. This information may include records of transactions held
in the Face Matching Services hub, which are records that will not contain facial images,
biometric templates or any other identification information about an individual. Amendment 4
omits the definition of IGIS official from clause 5, as this definition is not required following the
insertion of new subparagraph 33(1)(a)(i) as a result of Amendment 26.
15. Amendment 26 provides that an entrusted person may disclose protected information to the
Commonwealth Ombudsman or another officer within the meaning of subsection 35(1) of the
Ombudsman Act 1976 for the purpose of the Ombudsman official exercising a power, or
performing a function or duty, as an Ombudsman official. This amendment is intended to support
the Commonwealth Ombudsman to perform its functions under the Ombudsman Act, including
investigating complaints, as well as other functions conferred on the Ombudsman by the
Ombudsman Act or any other Commonwealth Act, or any regulations made under those Acts.
Amendment 5 omits the definition of Ombudsman official from clause 5, as the definition of an
Ombudsman official is not required following the insertion of new subparagraph 33(1)(a)(ii)as a
result of Amendment 26.
16. Amendment 26 ensures that an entrusted person may disclose protected information to the
Information Commissioner, or to an official of the OAIC, for the purpose of that official
exercising a power, or performing a function or duty as an official of the OAIC. As defined in
Amendment 26, an official of the OAIC includes the Information Commissioner, a member of the
8
staff of the OAIC, or a consultant engaged under the Australian Information Commissioner Act
2010. Amendment 26 is intended to support the Information Commissioner to perform its
functions as the independent national privacy regulator, including its investigation, enforcement
and oversight functions under the Privacy Act in relation to the Bill. In particular, Amendment 26
would support the Information Commissioner in performing the annual assessment of the
approved identity verification facilities required by clause 40, as amended by Amendments 30,
32, and 33. Amendment 26 would assist the Information Commissioner in undertaking this
assessment by ensuring that an entrusted person can disclose protected information to the
Information Commissioner (or OAIC staff) for this purpose.
17. Amendment 26 also provides that an entrusted person may disclose protected information to the
National Anti-Corruption Commissioner, or another staff member of the NACC, for the purpose
of the National Anti-Corruption Commissioner exercising a power, or performing a function or
duty in their capacity as NACC official. Amendment 26 is intended to enable the NACC to obtain
relevant information in order to perform its functions under the National Anti-Corruption
Commission Act 2022, including to detect corrupt conduct and to undertake investigations into
serious or systemic corrupt conduct within the Commonwealth public sector, as well as other
functions conferred by the NACC Act and other Acts. Similarly, the clause would enable the
Inspector of the NACC to obtain relevant information in order to perform its functions under the
NACC Act, including oversight functions and detecting and investigating corrupt conduct within
and relating to the NACC. This recognises the functions of the Commissioner and Inspector as
part of the broader Commonwealth integrity framework, and their role in supporting the proper
enforcement of the law.
18. The exceptions in Amendment 26 ensure that an entrusted person will not be inappropriately
subject to criminal liability for their conduct where the disclosure is made to the officials of the
relevant Commonwealth integrity agencies for the purpose of performing a function or duty, or
exercising a power in their capacity as an official of that integrity agency. Amendment 26 will
promote the right to freedom of expression by expanding the range of Commonwealth integrity
agencies to which entrusted persons can lawfully disclose protected information. It could also be
said to further promote the right to freedom of expression by ensuring Commonwealth integrity
agencies can appropriately perform their integrity functions, including the OAIC’s function under
the Bill to undertaken an annual assessment of the approved identity verification facilities.
19. Therefore Amendment 26 would further mitigate any limitation on the right to freedom of
expression that may be considered to result from the offences in subclauses 30(1) and 30(2) of the
Bill. The purpose of this limitation is reasonable and necessary given the sensitive nature of the
information to which entrusted persons will have access, and implications for an individual if
their identification information is unnecessarily disclosed. The limitation is proportionate to
protect the privacy of individuals, and is one of the key privacy safeguards built into the Bill.
The right to the presumption of innocence contained in Article 14(2) of the ICCPR
20. Article 14(2) of the ICCPR provides that anyone charged with a criminal offence shall have the
right to be presumed innocent until proven guilty according to law. It imposes on the prosecution
the burden of proving a criminal charge and guarantees that no guilt can be presumed until the
charge has been proved beyond reasonable doubt.
21. Amendment 26 and the Bill engages the right to the presumption of innocence under article 14(2)
of the ICCPR. This is because Amendment 26 and the Bill provide that a defendant bears an
evidential burden in relation to certain offence-specific defences.
22. The offences in subclauses 30(1) and (2) that require a defendant to bear an evidential burden in
relation to an applicable defence in the Bill, including the exceptions amended by Amendment 26,
may amount to a limitation on the right to be presumed innocent. This includes provisions where
9
an evidential burden is created by expressing a matter to be a defence or exception to an offence
or providing that the defendant must adduce or point to evidence suggesting a reasonable
possibility of the matter. Requiring the defendant to bear the evidential burden in this way may
limit article 14(2) of the ICCPR, as a defendant's failure to discharge the burden may permit their
conviction despite reasonable doubt as to their guilt. However, under international human rights
law, a requirement for a defendant to bear an evidential burden will not necessarily limit the
presumption of innocence provided that the law is not unreasonable in the circumstances and
maintains the rights of the accused. The purpose of the reverse onus provision is relevant in
determining its justification.
23. Subclauses 30(1) and (2) of the Bill and offence-specific defences in clauses 31 to 35 of the Bill
(including as amended by Amendment 26, 27 and 28) serve the legitimate objective of protecting
personal information by creating criminal offences applying to current and former entrusted
persons, such as current and former Departmental employees, who record, disclose or access
protected information (including personal information). The maximum penalty for the offences
would be 2 years’ imprisonment. This penalty reflects the serious consequences that may arise
from the relevant conduct, given that a breach of the obligations of entrusted persons may place a
person’s life or safety at risk, in particular shielded persons.
24. The offence-specific exceptions to these offences, for which the defendant will bear the evidential
burden, ensure that an entrusted person will not be inappropriately subject to criminal liability for
their conduct where the recording, disclosure or access was:
• authorised by a law of the Commonwealth or of a state or territory (provided for in
paragraph 30(3)(a))
• in compliance with a requirement under a law of the Commonwealth or of a state or
territory (provided for in paragraph 30(3)(b))
• for the purposes of the Act (as authorised by clause 31 of the Bill)
• in exercising powers, or performing functions or duties, relating to an approved identity
verification facility (as authorised by clause 31 of the Bill)
• for the purpose of lessening or preventing a serious and imminent threat to human life or
health (as authorised by clause 32 of the Bill)
• for the purpose of an official of a Commonwealth integrity agency exercising a power, or
performing a function or duty in their capacity as an official of that integrity agency (as
authorised by clause 33 provided for in Amendment 26), or
• with the express consent of the person to whom the information recorded, disclosed or
accessed relates (as authorised by subclause 35(1) as amended by Amendment 27), or
with the express consent of the state or territory authority that supplied the information in
relation to the NDLFRS (as authorised by subclause 35(2) as amended by
Amendment 28).
25. There is a rational connection between the limitation on the right to the presumption of innocence
through the imposition of defences that have a reverse burden of proof and protecting entrusted
persons from criminal prosecution for conduct undertaken as a legitimate part of the exercise of
their duties and function.
26. It is reasonable and necessary for a defendant to bear an evidential burden where the facts in
relation to the defence are peculiarly within the knowledge of the defendant, and where it would
be significantly more difficult and costly for the prosecution to prove (see the Attorney-General’s
10
Department’s Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Infringement Notices and Enforcement
Powers). In accordance with the principle at paragraph 4.3.1 of the Guide, a matter should only be
included in an offence-specific defence, as opposed to being specified as an element of the
offence, where:
• it is peculiarly within the knowledge of the defendant, and
• it would be significantly more difficult and costly for the prosecution to disprove than for
the defendant to establish the matter.
27. It will be peculiarly within the defendant’s knowledge as to the basis on which they believed they
were authorised to do so, for the following reasons.
• There are a vast range of legitimate circumstances in which entrusted persons will need to
access, make a record of, or disclose protected information in performing their duties.
Every time they do so, they will need to be sure that they have appropriate authorisation
under the Bill.
• The offences in clause 30 will only apply to entrusted persons, which is defined in
subclause 30(4) to be limited to persons employed by, or contractors engaged to provide
services to, the Department. It will not apply to the general public or persons outside the
Department. Entrusted officers will have received training and on-the-job supervision and
oversight, and it is reasonable to expect that they will understand their obligations under
the Bill when dealing with protected information. Internal guidance policies and
procedures will also be in place in order to ensure that entrusted persons understand the
need to, and are supported to make, case by case decisions about whether they are
authorised to access, make a record of, or disclose protected information before they take
such action.
28. In addition, it will be significantly more difficult and costly for the prosecution to prove, beyond a
reasonable doubt, that the entrusted person was not authorised to access, make a record of, or
disclose protected information, To do this, it would be necessary to negative a significant number
of facts – including that the protected information was not disclosed for the purposes of the Act or
in the course of the entrusted person performing their functions or duties (as provided for in the
exception in clause 31) as well as the fact that there was authority for the person’s actions in any
Commonwealth, state or territory law (as provided for in subclause 30(3)(a)). This would be in
addition to negativing the application of all of the other exceptions set out at clauses 32 to 35 of
the Bill. In practice, given the range of laws that might authorise such actions, and the number of
actions that might be performed for the purposes of the Act, it may be impossible for the
prosecution to disprove all of these matters. At best, it would be extremely costly and
burdensome.
29. In contrast, if an entrusted person had a particular reason for thinking that their conduct was
authorised in line with the Bill then it would not be difficult for them to describe where they
thought that authority arose. This is particularly the case given entrusted persons will be
employees of, or contractors with, the Department, and will have received appropriate training
and supervision in how to appropriately handle protected information. In line with
subsection 13.3(6) of the Criminal Code Act 1995, the entrusted person would only need to
adduce or point to evidence suggesting a reasonable possibility that their access to, or recording or
disclosure of, protected information was authorised by one of the exceptions in the Bill in order to
discharge the evidential burden.
30. For these reasons, the offence-specific exceptions in the Bill are reasonable and necessary, as they
are consistent with the two-limb test set out in paragraph 4.3.1 of the Guide. They are matters that
are peculiarly within the knowledge of the defendant, and would be significantly more difficult
11
and costly for the prosecution to disprove than for the defendant to establish. Therefore it is
reasonable that a defendant bears an evidential burden in relation to certain offence-specific
defences.
31. The exceptions set out in the Bill (including as amended by Amendments 26, 27 and 28) are
proportionate because, consistent with section 13.3 of the Criminal Code, the evidential burden
requires the defendant to adduce or point to evidence that suggests a reasonable possibility that a
particular matter exists or does not exist. It does not require the defendant to prove those matters
beyond reasonable doubt. Further, if the defendant discharges an evidential burden, the
prosecution will also be required to disprove those matters beyond reasonable doubt. The reversed
evidential burden provisions in the Bill, including as provided for in Amendments 26, 27 and 28,
are also proportionate because they create offence-specific defences that operate in addition to,
not instead of, the general defences available at criminal law.
Protection against arbitrary or unlawful interference with privacy contained in Article 17
of the ICCPR
32. Article 17 of the ICCPR prohibits arbitrary or unlawful interference with a person’s privacy,
family, home or correspondence and unlawful attacks on a person’s honour or reputation. It also
provides that everyone has the right to the protection of the law against such interference or
attacks.
33. The right to privacy articulated in Article 17 may be subject to permissible limitations that are
authorised by law, are not arbitrary, pursue a legitimate objective, are necessary to achieve that
objective, and are a proportionate means of achieving it. In order for an interference with the right
to privacy not to be arbitrary, the interference must be for a reason consistent with the provisions,
aims and objectives of the ICCPR and be reasonable in the particular circumstances. The United
Nations Human Rights Committee has interpreted ‘reasonableness’ in this context to mean that
‘any interference with privacy must be proportional to the end sought and be necessary in the
circumstances of any given case’.1
34. The Bill engages Article 17 by authorising the Department to collect, use and disclose personal or
sensitive information covered by the definition of identification information for the purposes of
providing the identity verification services. The privacy, accountability and transparency
measures contained in the Bill provide appropriate safeguards against any limitations on the right
to privacy as a result of the identity verification services provided for by the Bill. This ensures
that privacy is an ongoing and primary consideration in the implementation of the Bill and the
identity verification services.
35. The amendments to the Bill set out below may be considered to engage the right to privacy. The
amendments either seek to enhance the existing privacy protections contained in the Bill, or
introduce new privacy protections into the Bill’s framework. These measures ensure that privacy
is an ongoing and primary consideration in the implementation of the Bill and the identity
verification services. Accordingly, the measures further ensure that any limitation on the right to
privacy under the Bill are proportionate to the legitimate objective of promoting privacy rights.
36. The following amendments may be considered to engage the right to privacy:
• Amendment 6 – providing that ‘identification information’ under the Bill is ‘personal
information’ for the purposes of the Privacy Act
1 United Nations Human Rights Committee, The right to privacy in the digital age, UN Doc A/HRC/27/37, 30
June 2014, paragraph 21, quoting United Nations Human Rights Committee, Toonan v. Australia,
Communication No. 488/1992, paragraph 8.3.
12
• Amendment 12 – which would explicitly prohibit the use or disclosure of identification
information obtained for the purpose of requesting or providing identity verification
services being used for data profiling, online tracking or marketing.
• Amendments 14, 15 and 16 – providing that non-compliance with a requirement of a
participation agreement or privacy related rules will be taken to be an ‘interference with
the privacy of an individual’ under the Privacy Act, and can also result in suspension or
termination of the ability of a party to the agreement to request identity verification
services
• Amendments 7, 8, 9, 11, 23, 27 and 28 – requiring express consent
• Amendment 10 – requiring the Department to notify those parties to a participation
agreement that are relevant to, or impacted by, a data breach reported to the Information
Commissioner under subclause 9(2)(f), and requiring the party directly impacted by the
data breach to take reasonable steps to notify each individual to whom the relevant
identification information relates
• Amendments 30, 32 and 33 – providing that the annual assessment of the approved
identify verification facilities by the Information Commissioner is taken to be an
assessment under paragraph 33C(1)(a) of the Privacy Act
• Amendments 31, 34, 35 and 36, – requiring the Minister to undertake an interim review
of the operation of the Bill, including its privacy protections, and
• Amendment 37 – empowering the Minister to make Rules in relation to privacy
obligations that must be met by parties to participation agreements and requiring the
Minister to consult with the public on all rules and the Information Commissioner on
rules related to privacy.
• Amendment 13 – requiring that where a requesting entity no longer needs a facial image
that was collected for the purpose of requesting an FVS, the entity must take reasonable
steps to destroy the facial image after the purpose for which it is collected is satisfied.
37. All of the above amendments seek to enhance the existing privacy protections contained in the
Bill. Accordingly, these measures can be considered to promote, and not limit, the right to privacy
as discussed below.
The definition of identification information
38. Amendment 6 inserts new subclause 6(6) to provide that identification information, as defined in
clause 6 of the Bill, is taken to be personal information for the purposes of the Privacy Act.
Subsection 6(1) of the Privacy Act provides that personal information means information or an
opinion about an identified individual, or an individual who is reasonably identifiable:
• whether the information or opinion is true or not; and
• whether the information or opinion is recorded in a material form or not.
39. Identification information includes certain types of ‘sensitive information’ (which is a type of
personal information and defined at section 6 of the Privacy Act) and other types of personal
identifiers which satisfies the definition of ‘personal information’ at subsection 6(1) of the
Privacy Act.
13
40. New subclause 6(6) will only apply to parties to a participation agreement who are subject to the
Privacy Act (entities covered by paragraph 9(1)(a) of the Bill). This provision is not intended to
apply to other parties who may be subject to participation agreements (entities covered by
paragraphs 9(1)(b) to 9(1)(e) of the Bill).
41. Amendment 6 puts beyond doubt that, when dealing with identification information, parties to the
participation agreement covered by paragraph 9(1)(a) of the Bill, must comply with the
requirements in the Privacy Act, including the Australian Privacy Principles, which regulates the
handling of personal information. For example, this includes APP 11 which requires APP entities
to take active measures to ensure the security of personal information they hold and to actively
consider whether they are permitted to retain this personal information. Further, amending the
definition of identification information in this way promotes the right to privacy by engaging the
privacy safeguards contained within the Privacy Act relating to personal information, in
particular, where there has been an ‘interference with privacy’ in relation to an APP entity’s
dealing with identification information. An ‘interference with privacy’ is defined in section 13 of
the Privacy Act, and is a breach of that Act or of a privacy-related provision in certain other
legislation.
42. The Privacy Act confers a range of regulatory powers on the Information Commissioner,
including investigation and enforcement powers. Where the Information Commissioner has
identified an interference with privacy, there are a number of regulatory powers available to the
Commissioner to work with an entity to facilitate compliance with legal obligations and best
practice privacy practice. In more serious cases, this includes the civil penalty provision at section
13G of the Privacy Act in cases of serious or repeated interference with privacy by an APP entity.
Interference with privacy of an individual
43. Amendment 14 would add a new clause 10A, which would provide that non-compliance with a
participation agreement constitutes an ‘interference with the privacy of an individual’ for the
purposes of section 13 of the Privacy Act. This would apply to a party to a participation
agreement who is subject to the Privacy Act if the party does not comply with:
• privacy-related aspects of the participation agreement, which are those matters provided
for in clause 9 and 10 of the Bill (except for paragraph 10(1)(b) which is specific to
access policies), or
• rules prescribed for the purposes of subsection 44(1A) (as provided for in
Amendment 37).
44. Access policies (as provided for in clause 14 of the Bill) are intended to be used by the
Department to set contemporary standards to protect the security of identity verification services,
and ensure they are only used for appropriate purposes. A breach of access policies will not
always constitute an interference with the privacy of an individual, and therefore
paragraph 10(1)(b) is excluded as set out above.
45. This amendment would clarify the application of the Privacy Act and more directly enliven the
Information Commissioner’s regulatory powers under Parts IV and V of the Privacy Act where
there has been a privacy-related breach of a participation agreement. For example, this provides
for an individual to complain to the Information Commissioner under section 36 of the Privacy
Act about an act or practice that may be an interference with privacy of the individual. This
amendment clarifies the intention that participation agreements are privacy-enhancing and
consistent with the APPs. In particular, the compliance obligations under the Bill do not alter a
party to a participation agreement’s obligations under the Privacy Act.
14
46. Amendment 14 also expands the consequences for non-compliance with the privacy obligations
for a party to a participation agreement that is subject to the Privacy Act, beyond the suspension
or termination of the participation agreement in accordance with clause 12. This better protects
the privacy rights of individuals whose personal information is dealt with by a party to a
participation agreement (that is subject to the Privacy Act) by clarifying that the regulatory
powers of the Information Commissioner apply for non-compliance with privacy obligations
under the agreement.
Prohibiting the use or disclosure of identification information for particular purposes
47. Amendment 12 would insert new subclause 9(4) into the Bill to require that a participation
agreement must provide that a party to the agreement is not authorised to use or disclose
identification information obtained for the purpose of requesting and providing identity
verification services for the purposes of any of the following:
• engaging in activities that would allow the entity to create a data profile of the person
whose identity is being verified, including where it would allow their behaviour (whether
online or offline) to be tracked
• offering to supply goods or services
• advertising or promoting goods or services
• enabling another entity to offer to supply goods or services
• enabling another entity to advertise or promote goods or services
• market research.
48. This amendment would prevent the identity verification services from being used for data
profiling, online tracking or marketing. It makes it clear that this applies to both parties who
request identity verification services, as well as the Department, in its role providing the identity
verification services.
49. Non-compliance with the explicit prohibition in new subclause 9(4) could result in suspension or
termination of the ability of a party to the agreement to request identity verification services, in
accordance with clause 12.
50. For a party subject to the Privacy Act (which includes the Department), non-compliance with the
explicit prohibition in new subclause 9(4) may also enliven the regulatory powers of the
Information Commissioner under Part IV and V of the Privacy Act. For example, an individual
may complain to the Information Commissioner under section 36 of the Privacy Act about an act
or practice that may be an interference with privacy of the individual. This is made clear through
Amendments 6 and 14. Under Amendment 6, identification information is taken to be personal
information for the purposes of the Privacy Act. In accordance with Amendment 14,
non-compliance with the new subclause 9(4) by a party to a participation agreement subject to the
Privacy Act may be taken to be an interference with the privacy of an individual and covered by
sections 13 and 13G of that Act. Accordingly, this amendment would promote the privacy rights
of individuals who disclose information for identity verification purposes by further ensuring their
personal information may only be used or disclosed by a party for the purpose of requesting or
providing identity verification services.
15
Express consent
51. Amendments 7, 8, 9, 11, 23, 27 and 28 will replace any reference to ‘consent’ references to
‘express consent’.
• Clause 9 of the Bill contains the privacy obligations relating to participation agreements,
and requires participation agreements to provide provisions for how a party to a
participation agreement obtains an individual’s consent to the collection, use and
disclosure, for the purposes of requesting identity verification services, of identification
information that relates to the individual included in such a request. Amendments 7, 8, 9
and 11 will require any consent in this context to be express consent; and
• Clause 35 provides a general exception to the offences in clause 30 for entrusted persons
who disclose protected information where the individual whose information is disclosed
consents to the disclosure, or where the state or territory authority that supplied the
information that is held in or generated using the NDLFRS consents to the recording,
disclosure or access. Amendments 23, 27 and 28 will require any consent in these
scenarios to be express consent.
52. The above amendments will promote the right to privacy by ensuring individuals whose personal
information is proposed to be dealt within under the Bill expressly consent to their personal
information being used for the purpose proposed. This will promote the privacy rights of those
individuals by enhancing the transparency of how their personal information is proposed to be
dealt with and ensures those individuals are able to make an informed decision whether to agree
to their personal information being used for those purposes.
Notification of data breaches
53. Amendment 10 will expand the notification requirements relating to data breaches to align the
notification requirements under the Bill with the with the Notifiable Data Breaches scheme under
the Privacy Act. It will do this by requiring the Department to notify each party to a participation
agreement that is relevant to, or impacted by, a data breach which is reported to the Information
Commissioner under existing paragraph 9(2)(f). New paragraph 9(2)(h) will also impose
obligations on such parties to take reasonable steps to notify each individual to whom the
identification information subject to the data breach relates.
54. New paragraph 9(2)(g) in Amendment 10 will promote privacy rights by imposing a positive
obligation on the Department to notify relevant parties to participation agreements of data
breaches. This will enable notified entities to take measures to safeguard personal information
held by them which may be susceptible to being accessed in data breaches relevant to them (for
example, data breaches to a related government agency that is also party to a participation
agreement). Similarly, new paragraph 9(2)(h) will promote the right to privacy of the individuals
whose information is impacted by the data breach by ensuring those persons are informed of a
breach in relation to their personal information and are able to take measures to mitigate any
consequences that might arise from their personal information being the subject of a data breach.
Annual assessment of the approved identity verification facilities by the Information Commissioner
55. Clause 40 of the Bill requires the Information Commissioner to conduct an annual assessment of
the operation and management of the approved identity verification service facilities. These
facilities are the technical components that enable the department to provide the identity
verification services. Amendments would amend clause 40 of the Bill to ensure the annual
assessment aligns with, and leverages, the Information Commissioner’s assessment functions and
powers in the Privacy Act.
16
56. Amendment 30, 32 and 33 would amend clause 40 to require the Information Commissioner to
undertake an annual assessment of the approved identity verification facilities in relation to any
act or practice of the Department during the financial year. Amendment 33 will provide that the
assessment made under clause 40 is taken to be an assessment under paragraph 33C(1)(a) of the
Privacy Act. The amendments ensure that the Information Commissioner will not be limited in
determining the scope of its assessment of the approved identity verification facilities. It is also
intended to provide certainty that the Information Commissioner’s annual assessment will be
conducted in a manner consistent with existing privacy assessment function provided at
paragraph 33C(1)(a) of the Privacy Act. Paragraph 33C(1)(a) of the Privacy Act provides the
Information Commissioner with the power to conduct assessments of APP entities about whether
personal information they hold is being maintained and handled in accordance with the APPs.
This will promote the right to privacy by making it clear that the Information Commissioner can
rely on its existing powers and enforcement mechanisms provided in the Privacy Act to support
the conduct of the annual assessment. This includes powers to require APP entities to provide
information or produce a document where the Commissioner has reason to believe that an entity
being assessed has information or a document relevant to an assessment under section 33C of the
Privacy Act. It also ensures that the Information Commissioner’s assessment function under
clause 40 aligns with the OAIC’s Guide to Privacy Regulatory Action.2
57. Subsection 33C(8) of the Privacy Act provides that the Information Commissioner may publish
the Information Commissioner’s assessments on the OAIC website. As set out in the OAIC’s
Guide to Privacy Regulatory Action,3 the OAIC recognise that there may be circumstances when
it would be inappropriate to publish all or part of an assessment report due to statutory secrecy
provisions or reasons of privacy, confidentiality, commercial sensitivity, security or privilege. The
OAIC will take these factors into account when deciding whether to publish an assessment report
in full or in an abridged version, and the OAIC would generally consult with the relevant target of
the report before publication. This is an important factor which promotes transparency as well as
the right to privacy, as it enables the OAIC to ensure that its assessments would not unduly
release personal information through the publication of its assessment, or other sensitive
information about the approved identity verification facilities.
Interim review
58. Amendments 31, 34, 35 and 36 amend clause 43 of the Bill to require the Minister to cause an
interim review of the Act to commence as soon as practicable after 12 months of the
commencement of clause 43. This interim review is to occur in addition to the requirement in
clause 43 for the Minister to cause a review of the operation of the Act and the provision of the
identity verification services to be started within 2 years of the commencement of clause 43.
59. The interim review will consider the adequacy and operation of:
• the privacy protections contained in the Act (new paragraph 43(1B)(a)), which may
include, but is not limited to, consideration of:
o the privacy obligations of parties to participation agreements (clauses 9 and 10 of
the Bill), and
o the data breach notification requirements in relation to the NDLFRS hosting
agreement, which is provided at subclauses 13(3) and (4), and
2 Guide to Privacy Regulatory Action, Chapter 9: Privacy Assessments, available at
https://www.oaic.gov.au/about-the-OAIC/our-regulatory-approach/guide-to-privacy-regulatory-action/chapter-
9-privacy-assessments, published January 2023, accessed November 2023.
3 Guide to Privacy Regulatory Action, Chapter 9: Privacy Assessments, at 9.68.
17
• the security requirements and obligations contained in the Act (new
paragraph 43(1B)(b)), which may include, but is not limited to, consideration of:
o the requirement for the Department to maintain the security of identification
information included in a database in the NDLFRS, including by encrypting the
information (paragraph 13(4)(a))
o the requirement for the Department to maintain the security of electronic
communications to and from the approved identity verification facilities,
including by encrypting the information (paragraph 25(a)), and
o the requirement for the Department to protect the information from unauthorised
interference or unauthorised access (paragraph 25(b), and
• the penalties for non-compliance with obligations set out in participation agreements,
including consideration of whether civil penalties should apply to any such
non-compliance (new paragraph 43(1B)(c)), noting that the current penalty for
non-compliance with a participation agreement is suspension or termination of the ability
of a party to the agreement to request identity verification services (paragraph 12(c)).
60. Amendment 35 to the Bill further provides that the President of the Australian Human Rights
Commission, the Human Rights Commissioner and the Information Commissioner, must be
consulted in relation to the interim review. This will ensure that the interim review is informed by
expert views on human rights, including privacy rights.
61. The interim review promotes the right to privacy by ensuring that there will be timely
examination of the adequacy and operation of the privacy protections, security requirements and
penalties for non-compliance with such obligations contained in the Act. It will provide the
opportunity to identify and address any areas for improvement to further enhance the strong
privacy and security protections in place.
Rules and consultation on the rules
62. Amendment 37 would expand the Minister’s rule making power in clause 44 to provide that the
Minister may make rules in relation to privacy obligations that must be met by parties to
participation agreements.
63. Amendment 37 would require the Minister to consult with the public before making any rules
under the Bill. Further, before the Minister makes any rules related to privacy, including any rules
made in accordance with Amendment 37, the Minister must consult with the Information
Commissioner.
64. The Minister’s expanded rule making power to allow rules to be made in relation to the privacy
obligations that must be met by parties to participation agreements will promote privacy rights. It
will do this by ensuring the Minister has the ability to set additional privacy requirements or
obligations that must be met by parties to participation agreements. For example, this power may
be used to require a party to a participation agreement to put in place additional protections in
response to the Information Commissioner’s annual assessment of the approved identity
verification facilities (clause 40), or to address operational issues identified through the annual
reporting (clause 41) or the interim or 2 year review (clause 43) that may require further privacy
safeguards for entities seeking to request the use of the identity verification services.
65. As one of the key functions of the Information Commissioner is to protect the privacy rights of
individuals in accordance with the Privacy Act, the consultation requirement in Amendment 37
promotes the right to privacy by harnessing the expertise of the OAIC and enhancing oversight of
18
the privacy-related rules before they are made. The consultation requirement will help ensure any
privacy-related rules made by the Minister align with, and promote, the objectives of the Privacy
Act. The requirement to consult with the public similarly provides additional oversight and
transparency about any rules that the Minister proposes to make before they are made, and
provides other stakeholders with the opportunity to make submissions on privacy-related rules, or
other rules.
66. The amendments to the commencement provisions of the Bill would also provide the Minister
with sufficient opportunity to undertake the required consultation with the Information
Commissioner and the public on any proposed rules that the Minister seeks to have in place upon
commencement of the Bill, such as the fees for private sector entities. This will also provide
greater opportunity to work with industry and state and territory government agencies to support
the implementation of the Bill.
Destruction of facial images
67. Amendment 13 would insert an additional privacy obligation to be contained in participation
agreements for parties that request an FVS. The new obligation would require parties who request
an FVS to take reasonable steps to destroy a facial image that has been created by the party as
soon as practicable after the image is no longer required.
68. The only exceptions to the general requirement to destroy facial images will be if the record is a
Commonwealth record within the meaning of the Archives Act 1983, or a party is required to
retain the record under a law of the Commonwealth, a state or a territory, or by order of a court or
tribunal. Requesting parties who do not comply with this requirement may have their participation
agreement cancelled or suspended. In addition, under new clause 10A, non-compliance with this
obligation will be considered an interference with the privacy of an individual under the Privacy
Act.
69. This additional obligation will promote the right to privacy by ensuring that entities requesting an
FVS have a positive obligation to destroy facial images after they are no longer required by that
entity for the purpose of identity verification. This will help ensure facial images are only
collected and retained for the limited purpose, and for minimum time necessary, to verify a
person’s identity.
70. The amendment will further promote the privacy rights of persons whose facial images are
collected by mitigating impacts of data breaches or other unlawful access to systems of requesting
FVS entities where facial images are stored. This will reduce potential incidents of identity theft,
fraud or other unlawful conduct that could result from access to facial images.
Conclusion
71. The proposed amendments are compatible with the applicable human rights and freedoms.
72. The Bill as amended is compatible with the applicable human rights and freedoms as provided for
in the Explanatory Memorandum to the Bill. To the extent that it may limit human rights,
particularly the right to privacy, those limitations are reasonable, necessary and proportionate to
achieving that objective.
19
NOTES ON AMENDMENTS
Amendment 1—commencement
1. Amendment 1 amends clause 2 of the Bill to provide a new commencement table. The effect of
this amendment is that only clauses 1 to 14, 42 and 44, rather than the whole Bill, will commence
on the day after the Bill receives the Royal Assent. All other provisions in the Bill will commence
on the earlier of:
• the day rules made under the rule making power at clause 44 commence, and
• the day after the end of the period of 6 months beginning on the day the Bill receives the
Royal Assent.
2. Amendment 1 provides certainty that the provisions relating to the requesting or provision of the
identity verification services will commence once rules that are critical to support the effective
operation of the DVS, FVS and FIS have commenced, or on the day 6 months after the day after
the Royal Assent.
3. The following rules that may be made by the Minister are critical to support the effective
operation of the identity verification services:
• rules prescribing a state or territory privacy law for the purposes of a participation
agreement (paragraph 9(1)(b)) and the NDLFRS hosting agreement
(subparagraph 13(2)(a)(ii)
• rules prescribing a government authority of the purposes of a participation agreement
(paragraph 9(1)(d)), and
• rules prescribing the fees for requests for identity verification services or for connections
to the approved identity verification facilities to allow the making of electronic
communications to, and receipt of electronic communications from, those facilities
(clause 42).
4. It is necessary for clauses 1 to 14, 42 and 44 to commence before the rest of the Bill in order to
ensure that the Minister is empowered to make the above rules. Clauses 1 to 14 includes the
definitions for the Bill, and the obligations for parties to participation agreements and the
NDLFRS hosting agreement. Clause 42 provides that the Minister may make rules in relation to
the imposition, collection and recovery of fees, which rely on these definitions. Clause 44 is a
broad rule-making power which ensures there is authority to make such rules as are necessary to
ensure the effective operation of the Act to be established by the Bill.
5. The commencement provisions in Amendment 1 also support Amendment 37 which implements
the Government’s response to Recommendation 9 of the Committee’s report. The commencement
provisions ensure there will be sufficient opportunity to consult with the Information
Commissioner on the rules that need to be in place to support the effective operation of the
identity verification services, insofar they relate to privacy, before they are made under clause 44.
Amendment 1 will also allow for sufficient opportunity to undertake public consultation prior to
any rules outlined above being made under clause 44.
Amendment 2, 3, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25, 29—prohibition on the recording, disclosing or access
protected information
6. Amendment 2, 3, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25 and 29 would amend the Bill to put beyond doubt that an
entrusted person (including a Departmental official) is prohibited from recording, disclosing or
20
accessing protected information unless it is in accordance with the objects of this Bill or in other
limited circumstances.
7. Amendment 24 omits the heading to Division 2 (previously ‘When protected information can be
recorded, disclosed or accessed’) and replaces it with a new heading of ‘Prohibition on recording
or disclosure of, or access to, information by entrusted persons’.
8. Amendment 25 omits the heading to clause 30 (previously ‘Offences by entrusted persons’) and
replaces it with a new heading of ‘Prohibition on recording or disclosure of, or access to,
information by entrusted persons’.
9. The purpose of Amendments 24 and 25 is to better reflect the substantive content of clause 30 of
the Bill. Clause 30 of the Bill prohibits the recording or disclosure of, or access to, protected
information by:
• creating two criminal offences in relation to entrusted persons where they make a record
of, disclose or access protected information (subclauses 30(1) and (2)) – the maximum
penalty for both these offences would be imprisonment for two years, and
• providing exceptions to the two offences where the recording or disclosure of, or access
to, protected information is for the purposes of the Act, in accordance with the objects of
this Bill (clause 31), or in other limited circumstances (clauses 31 to 35).
10. The terms entrusted person and protected information are defined in subclause 30(4) of the Bill.
11. Amendment 2 would insert a note at the end of clause 3 to reflect the intent of Amendment 24 and
25 and to clarify that the existing prohibition provided by subclause 30(1) and (2) do not apply
where an entrusted person’s conduct is for the purposes of the Act, as set out in the objects set out
in clause 3 of the Bill.
12. Clause 3 is an objects clause that outlines the purposes of the Bill and can be used to resolve
uncertainty and ambiguity. Objects clauses may assist the courts and others in the interpretation of
legislation.
13. The note clarifies that the objects referred to in paragraphs 3(a), (b) and (d) are authorised and
provided for by Part 2 (Developing, operating and maintaining approved identity verification
facilities), Part 3 (Authorising collection, use and disclosure of identification information) and
Part 5 (Miscellaneous) respectively. The note also clarifies that in accordance with
paragraph 3(c), Part 4 of the Bill prohibits the use or disclosure of, or access to, identity
verification information, unless it is in accordance with the objects of this Bill or in other limited
circumstances.
14. Amendment 3, 19, 20, 21 and 29 would amend relevant simplified outlines in the Bill to reflect
the intent and purpose of Amendment 24 and 25. The simplified outline is included to assist
readers to understand the substantive provisions of the Bill. The outline is not intended to be
comprehensive. It is intended that readers should rely on the substantive provisions of the Bill.
15. Amendment 3 would insert additional information into the simplified outline of the Bill in
clause 4. Clause 4 provides a simplified outline of the Bill, including an overview of the operation
of the identity verification facilities and the services that are authorised to be conducted using
those facilities.
16. Amendment 3 would insert an outline of Part 4 of the Bill (Protection of information) into the
simplified outline at clause 4. The purpose of the amendment is to ensure that the simplified
outline at clause 4 reflects that Part 4 of the Bill prohibits the use or disclosure of, or access to,
21
identity verification information, unless it is in accordance with the objects of this Bill or in other
limited circumstances.
17. Amendment 19 would amend the simplified outline of Part 2 of the Bill (Developing, operating
and maintaining approved identity verification facilities) at clause 23. The amendment would
omit “The Department” at the beginning of the simplified outline of Part 2 and substitute “In
accordance with the object of this Act covered by paragraph 3(a), the Department”.
18. Paragraph 3(a) of the Bill provides that one of the objects of the Bill is to authorise the
Department to develop, operate, and maintain the approved identity verification facilities. The
purpose of the amendment is to ensure that the simplified outline of Part 2 reflects that the
Department is required to develop, operate and maintain the approved identity verification
facilities (the DVS hub, the Face Matching Service Hub and the NDLFRS) in accordance with the
object of the Bill covered by paragraph 3(a) of the Bill.
19. Amendment 20 would amend the simplified outline of Part 3 of the Bill (Authorising collection,
use and disclosure of identification information) at clause 26. The amendment would omit the
words ‘The Department’ from the beginning of the simplified outline of Part 3 and substitute the
words ‘In accordance with the object of this Act covered by paragraph 3(b), the Department’.
20. Paragraph 3(b) of the Bill provides that one of the objects of the Bill is to authorise the
Department, but not other persons or bodies, to collect, use and disclose identification information
that has been communicated to an approved identity verification service, or generated using the
NDLFRS, for purposes relating to:
• the use of 1:1 matching services (the DVS and the FVS) for verifying the identity of an
individual
• the use of 1:many matching services (the FIS) for protecting shielded persons or someone
else associated with a shielded person, or
• the NDLFRS.
21. The purpose of the amendment is to ensure that the simplified outline reflects that the Department
is required to collect, use and disclose identification information in accordance with the object of
this Bill covered by paragraph 3(b) of the Bill.
22. Amendment 21 would amend the simplified outline of Part 4 of the Bill (Protection of
information). The amendment would reflect in the simplified outline of Part 4 that:
• an object of this Bill is to protect identification information communicated to approved
identity verification facilities, and certain other information relating to the use or security
of those facilities, and
• the Bill does this by prohibiting the use or disclosure of, or access to, identity verification
information, unless it is in accordance with the objects of this Bill or in other limited
circumstances.
23. The aim of this amendment is to put beyond doubt that officials involved in providing the identity
verification services are prohibited from recording, disclosing or accessing protected information
unless it is in accordance with the objects of the Bill or in other limited circumstances.
24. Amendment 29 would amend the simplified outline of Part 5 of the Bill (Miscellaneous). This
amendment would reflect in the simplified outline of Part 5 that an object of this Bill is to provide
22
oversight and scrutiny of the operation and management of the approved identity verification
facilities, as provided in paragraph 3(d) of the Bill.
Amendments 4 and 5—disclosure to integrity agencies
25. Amendments 4 and 5 would omit the definition of IGIS official and Ombudsman official from
clause 5. These definitions are no longer necessary because new clause 33 as provided in
Amendment 26 incorporates on its face the definitions of the relevant persons in each integrity
agency to whom an entrusted person may disclose protected information.
Amendment 6—identification information
26. Amendment 6 would implement the Government’s response to Recommendation 2 of the
Committee’s report to provide that identification information, as defined in clause 6, is personal
information for the purposes of the Privacy Act.
27. Amendment 6 would insert a new sub-heading and new subclause 6(6) to provide that
identification information, as defined in clause 6 of the Bill, is taken to be personal information
for the purposes of the Privacy Act.
28. Subsection 6(1) of the Privacy Act provides that personal information means information or an
opinion about an identified individual, or an individual who is reasonably identifiable:
• whether the information or opinion is true or not; and
• whether the information or opinion is recorded in a material form or not.
29. Identification information includes certain types of ‘sensitive information’ (which is a type of
personal information and defined at subsection 6(1) of the Privacy Act) and other types of
personal identifiers which satisfies the definition of ‘personal information’ at subsection 6(1) of
the Privacy Act.
30. New subclause 6(6) would only apply to parties to a participation agreement who are subject to
the Privacy Act (entities covered by paragraph 9(1)(a) of the Bill). This provision is not intended
to apply to other parties who may be a party to a participation agreement (entities covered by
paragraphs 9(1)(b) to 9(1)(e) of the Bill).
31. Amendment 6 puts beyond doubt that, when dealing with identification information, parties to the
participation agreement, covered by paragraph 9(1)(a) of the Bill, must comply with the
requirements in the Privacy Act, including the Australian Privacy Principles (APP), which
regulates the handling of personal information. For example, this includes APP 11 which requires
APP entities to take active measures to ensure the security of personal information they hold and
to actively consider whether they are permitted to retain this personal information. To ensure
compliance with the requirements in the Privacy Act, entities should consider the Guide to
Securing Personal Information which provides guidance from the OAIC on the reasonable steps
entities are required to take to protect personal information.
32. Amendment 6 would also enable the Information Commissioner to more easily determine whether
there has been an ‘interference with privacy’ in relation to an entity’s dealing with identification
information. An ‘interference with privacy’ is defined in section 13 of the Privacy Act, and is a
breach of that Act or of a privacy-related provision in certain other legislation.
33. Where the Information Commissioner has identified an interference with privacy, there are a
number of enforcement powers available to the Commissioner. This includes the civil penalty
23
provision at section 13G of the Privacy Act in cases of serious or repeated interference with
privacy by an entity.
Amendments 7, 8, 9, 11, 23, 27, 28—express consent
34. Amendments 7, 8, 9, 11, 23, 27, 28 would implement the Government’s response to
Recommendation 10 of the Committee’s report to amend the Bill to only include express consent
and not implied consent. The amendments implement this recommendation by replacing all
references to ‘consent’ in the Bill with references to ‘express consent’.
35. Subsection 6(1) of the Privacy Act provides that ‘consent’ means express consent or implied
consent. The Australian Privacy Principles Guidelines from the OAIC provides guidance on the
differences between express and implied consent:
• Express consent is given explicitly, either orally or in writing. This could include a
handwritten signature, an oral statement, or use of an electronic medium or voice
signature to signify agreement.
• Implied consent arises where consent may reasonably be inferred in the circumstances
from the conduct of the individual and the APP entity.
36. The inclusion of express consent is intended to strengthen existing provisions in the Bill by
ensuring consent is obtained ‘explicitly.’ This is a reasonable and necessary additional safeguard
noting the Bill authorises for the collection, use and disclosure of an individual’s ‘identification
information’ (as defined at clause 6), which includes ‘sensitive information’ (as defined at
subsection 6(1) of the Privacy Act). It also aligns with the Australian Privacy Principles
Guidelines which notes that entities should ‘generally seek express consent from an individual
before handling the individual’s sensitive information, given the greater privacy impact this could
have.’
37. Amendment 7 would amend the simplified outline of Subdivision B of Division 2, to replace the
reference to ‘consent’ with a reference to ‘express consent’. The simplified outline is included to
assist readers to understand the substantive provisions of the Bill and, in this case, reflects the
substantive operation of paragraph 9(2)(b), as amended by Amendment 8.
38. Amendment 8 would amend paragraph 9(2)(b) to replace the reference to ‘consent’ with ‘express
consent’ to clarify that participation agreements are required to provide for the obtaining of an
individual’s express consent to the collection, use and disclosure, for the purposes of requesting
identity verification services, of identification information that relates to the individual included
in such a request. This requirement will apply to all participation agreements (including
government authorities, all private sector organisations and local government agencies). The only
limited exception is set out in subparagraphs 9(2)(b)(i) and (ii) and applies to requests made by
government authorities where the collection, use and disclosure of identification information for
the purpose of protecting a shielded person, or someone else associated with a shielded person,
are implicit in the functions conferred by law on the authority.
39. Amendment 9 would amend paragraph 9(2)(c) to replace the reference to ‘consent’ with ‘express
consent’. Paragraph 9(2)(c) requires a party to a participation agreement to provide, to an
individual from whom consent is being sought, information about the matters listed in subclause
9(3). The effect of this amendment is to provide that this information must be provided to a
person from whom express consent is being sought. This ensures the individual is provided with
details about how their information will be used and is in a position to provide express consent.
40. Amendment 11 would amend paragraph 9(3)(a) to replace the reference to ‘consent’ with ‘express
consent’. Subclause 9(3) sets out the information that must be provided to a person from whom
24
express consent is being sought. Paragraph 9(3)(a) requires information to be provided about how
the party seeking consent uses identity verification services. The effect of this amendment is to
provide this information must be provided in relation to how a party seeking express consent will
use the identity verification services.
41. Amendment 23 would amend the simplified outline of Part 4, to replace the reference to ‘consent’
with a reference to ‘express consent’. The simplified outline is included to assist readers to
understand the substantive provisions of the Bill and, in this case, reflects the substantive
operation of clause 35, as amended by Amendments 27 and 28.
42. Amendment 27 would amend paragraph 35(1)(a) to replace the reference to ‘consented’ with
‘expressly consented’. Clause 35 provides that an entrusted person may make a record of, disclose
or access protected information if they have the consent of the person to whom it relates. The
recording, disclosing or access must be done in accordance with that consent. The effect of this
amendment is to provide that this authorisation only applies if the entrusted person has the
express consent of the person to whom the protected information relates. In accordance with
paragraph 35(1)(b), the recording, disclosing or access must be done in accordance with that
express consent in order for the authorisation to apply.
43. Amendment 28 would amend subclause 35(2) to replace the references to ‘consents’ with
‘expressly consents’. Subclause 35(2) of the Bill provides that an entrusted person may make a
record of, disclose, or access protected information that was held in, or generated using the
NDLFRS (paragraph (a)) and was supplied by an authority of a state or territory if that authority
has consented to the recording, disclosure or access. The effect of this amendment is to provide
that this authorisation only applies if the entrusted person has the express consent of the relevant
authority to the recording, disclosure or access.
Amendment 10—notification of data breaches
44. Amendment 10 would implement the Government’s response to Recommendation 7 of the
Committee’s report to amend the Bill to ensure that individuals are notified when there is a data
breach that is likely to cause them serious harm.
45. Amendment 10 would insert new paragraph 9(2)(g) to require the Department to notify each party
to a participation agreement that is relevant to, or impacted by, a data breach, where a data breach
has been reported by the Department to the Information Commissioner in accordance with the
requirement in paragraph 9(2)(f) of the Bill.
46. This amendment would more clearly align the notification requirements in the Bill with the
notification requirements in the Notifiable Data Breaches scheme under Part IIIC of the
Privacy Act.
47. The amendment would ensure that other relevant parties to a participation agreement are notified
of a data breach in circumstances where:
• a party to a participation agreement has reported a breach of security to the Department in
accordance with the requirement in paragraph 9(2)(e) of the Bill, and
• the Department has reported the breach of security to the Information Commissioner
because it is a data breach that is reasonably likely to result in serious harm to an
individual whose identification information is involved in the breach, in accordance with
the requirement in paragraph 9(2)(f) of the Bill.
48. The purpose of the amendment is to ensure that all relevant parties to a participation agreement –
not just the party that reported the security breach – are aware of such breaches and can take any
25
appropriate and necessary action to mitigate any consequential impacts to their entity’s use of the
identity verification services. For example, data hosting agencies may decide to limit the types of
information available for identity verification purposes (in accordance with clause 11 of the Bill).
49. Amendment 10 would also insert new paragraph 9(2)(h) to require each party to a participation
agreement that is impacted by a breach notified to the Information Commissioner under
paragraph 9(2)(f) to take reasonable steps to notify each individual to whom the identification
information relates. This approach aligns with the notification requirement in paragraph 13(3)(c)
regarding the NDLFRS hosting agreement. It is also intended to align with the requirement in
subsection 26WL(2) of the Privacy Act, which requires APP entities subject to a data breach to
take reasonable steps to notify the individuals who are at risk from the breach.
50. Placing the notification requirement on entities impacted by the data breach seeks to ensure that
individuals do not receive multiple notifications regarding the same breach. Where multiple
parties to an agreement are involved in a data breach, the parties involved would be expected to
take steps to ensure the individual does not receive multiple notifications about the same breach.
For example, the parties involved could determine between them that one party would notify the
affected individuals. This may be considered reasonable steps for the other parties involved for
the purpose of the Bill. Furthermore, in practice, it is likely that only the information of customers
of impacted entities – rather than customers of entities relevant to the data breach – would be at
risk from the data breach.
51. Nothing in Amendment 10 is intended to exclude the operation of any state or territory
notification requirements. This includes, for example, the mandatory data breach (information
security incident) requirements on Victorian agencies under the Victorian Protective Data
Security Framework and Standards. The Notifiable Data Breaches scheme under Part IIIC of the
Privacy Act will also apply to those parties to a participation agreement that are subject to the
Privacy Act.
52. Non-compliance with a participation agreement can lead to the agreement being suspended or
terminated in accordance with clause 12 of the Bill. Further, if a non-compliant party is subject to
the Privacy Act, new clause 10A (inserted by Amendment 14) would also be applicable. New
clause 10A provides that privacy-related breaches of participation agreements by APP entities
will constitute an interference with privacy under the Privacy Act.
Amendment 12—further limitations on use of identification information
53. Amendment 12 inserts new subclause 9(4) to require that a participation agreement must provide
that a party to the agreement is not authorised to use or disclose identification information
obtained for the purpose of requesting and providing identity verification services for the
purposes of any of the following:
• engaging in activities that would allow the party to create a data profile of the person
whose identity is being verified (including where it would allow their behaviour to be
tracked (whether or not online)) (paragraph 9(4)(a))
• offering to supply goods or services (paragraph 9(4)(b))
• advertising or promoting goods or services (paragraph 9(4)(c))
• enabling another person or entity to offer to supply goods or services (paragraph 9(4)(d))
• enabling another person or entity to advertise or promote goods or services
(paragraph 9(4)(e))
26
• market research (paragraph 9(4)(f)).
54. New subclause 9(4) will apply to:
• a party to a participation agreement requesting identity verification services, and
• the Department in its role as a party to a participation agreement that provides the identity
verification services.
55. Non-compliance with the requirements of new subclause 9(4) could result in suspension or
termination of the ability of a party to the agreement to request identity verification services, in
accordance with clause 12.
56. For a party subject to the Privacy Act (which includes the Department), non-compliance with the
explicit prohibition in new subclause 9(4) may also enliven the regulatory powers of the
Information Commissioner under Part IV and V of the Privacy Act. For example, an individual
may complain to the Information Commissioner under section 36 of the Privacy Act about an act
or practice that may be an interference with privacy of the individual. This is made clear through
Amendments 6 and 14. Under Amendment 6, identification information is taken to be personal
information for the purposes of the Privacy Act. In accordance with Amendment 14,
non-compliance with the new subclause 9(4) by a party to a participation agreement subject to the
Privacy Act may be taken to be an interference with the privacy of an individual and covered by
sections 13 and 13G of that Act.
Amendment 13—destruction of facial images
57. Amendment 13 will amend Clause 10 (Extra privacy obligations of parties to participation
agreement that request services) to insert new paragraph 10(2)(aa).
58. New paragraph 10(2)(aa) will require parties to a participation agreement to take reasonable steps
to destroy each facial image of an individual that is created for the purposes of making a request
for the FVS as soon as reasonably practicable after the image is no longer required for the
purposes of the request. This new obligation will only apply to parties that make requests for an
FVS.
59. Facial image is defined in clause 5 of the Bill and means a digital still image of an individual’s
face (whether or not including the shoulders).
60. For example, this provision is intended to apply in circumstances where an individual has taken a
digital photo of themselves, for identity verification purposes, on a mobile application provided
by a party to participation agreement. After obtaining express consent, the party would use the
digital image created on their platform to verify that person’s identity.
61. Amendment 13 is drafted to be consistent with Australian Privacy Principle 11.2, which sets out
requirements for entities subject to the Privacy Act to take reasonable steps to destroy or
de-identify the personal information it holds. In line with APP 11.2, new paragraph 10(2)(aa) will
not apply if the image:
• a Commonwealth record within the meaning of section 3 of the Archives Act 1983 (Cth)
(subparagraph 10(2)(aa)(i)), or
• required by a law of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory, or by an order of a court
or tribunal, to be retained (subparagraph 10(2)(aa)(ii)).
27
62. Non-compliance with new paragraph 10(2)(aa) will be considered to be non-compliance with a
participation agreement and may lead to the suspension or termination of access to the FVS.
Non-compliance with a participation agreement can lead to the agreement being suspended or
terminated in accordance with clause 12 of the Bill. Further, if a non-compliant party is subject to
the Privacy Act, new clause 10A (inserted by Amendment 14) would also be applicable. New
clause 10A provides that privacy-related breaches of participation agreements by APP entities
will constitute an interference with privacy under the Privacy Act.
Amendment 14—failure to comply with participation agreements
63. Amendment 14 would implement the Government’s response to Recommendation 3 of the
Committee’s report to amend the Bill to provide that a breach of a participation agreement that
relates to a privacy matter by an APP entity constitutes an interference with privacy under the
Privacy Act.
64. Amendment 14 would insert new clause 10A. Clause 10A would provide that if an act or practice
of a party to a participation agreement, relating to personal information about an individual, does
not comply with a requirement of:
• clauses 9 and 10 of the Bill (other than paragraph 10(1)(b)) which set out the privacy
obligations and requirements for participation agreements (defined at clause 8 of the Bill)
(subparagraph (i)), or
• rules prescribed for the purposes of new subclause 44(1A) as provided for in
Amendment 37, namely rules relating to privacy with which a party to a participation
agreement must comply
then the act or practice is taken to be an ‘interference with privacy of the individual’ for the
purposes of the Privacy Act, and would be covered by sections 13 and 13G of that Act.
65. New paragraph 10A(1)(a) limits the application of this clause to parties to a participation
agreement that are subject to the Privacy Act and, in practice, covered by paragraph 9(1)(a) of the
Bill. In general terms, the Privacy Act applies to Ministers, Departments, a range of
Commonwealth agencies, and organisations with an annual turnover of less than $3,000,000 (see
sections 6, 6C and 6D of the Privacy Act).
66. Clauses 9 and 10 provide important privacy safeguards which, among other things, governs how
parties to participation agreements are authorised to collect, use and disclose identification
information, and requires such entities to implement certain procedures and take action to protect
the information of individuals when engaging with the identity verification services.
Identification information is defined at clause 6 of the Bill and includes certain types of sensitive
information (which is a type of personal information and defined at subsection 6(1) of the Privacy
Act) and other types of personal identifiers which satisfies the definition of personal information
at subsection 6(1) of the Privacy Act.
67. New clause 10A will not apply where a party to a participation agreement fails to comply with
paragraph 10(1)(b) of the Bill which requires compliance with access policies for the identity
verification services. Access policies (as provided for in clause 14 of the Bill) are intended to be
used by the Department to set contemporary standards to protect the security of identity
verification services, and ensure the services are only used for appropriate purposes. The
requirements in access policies are often unrelated to privacy matters.
68. Rules prescribed for the purposes of new subclause 44(1A) are intended to provide further privacy
obligations on parties to a participation agreement (in addition to those at clauses 9 and 10). For
example, this rule making power could be relevant and relied upon should there be a need to
28
provide additional protections in response to the Information Commissioner’s annual assessment
(clause 40 of the Bill), or operational issues that may require further privacy safeguards for
entities seeking to request the use of the identity verification services.
69. New subclause 10A(2) makes it clear that an act or practice of a party to a participation agreement
that does not comply with privacy related requirements in a participation agreement is taken to be
an interference with the privacy of the individual and, accordingly, is covered by sections 13 and
13G of the Privacy Act.
• Section 13 of the Privacy Act sets out the acts and practices that may be an interference
with the privacy of an individual, which includes a breach of an APP or a registered
Australian Privacy Principle privacy code.
• Section 13G of the Privacy Act is a civil penalty provision for cases of serious or repeated
interference with privacy by an entity and operates in addition to the numerous other
regulatory powers available to the Information Commissioner in relation to an
interference with privacy.
70. The purpose and intent of new clause 10A is threefold.
• Firstly, it provides certainty to entities subject to the Privacy Act, and the Australian
community, that non-compliance with the privacy safeguards and obligations in
participation agreements or prescribed in rules will constitute an interference with the
privacy of an individual for the purposes of the Privacy Act.
• Secondly, it better supports individuals by allowing them to make a complaint to the
Information Commissioner (including under section 36 of the Privacy Act) in relation to
an act or practice that may be an interference with privacy of the individual.
• Thirdly, it will more directly enliven the Information Commissioner’s functions and
regulatory powers under Parts IV and V of the Privacy Act where there has been non-
compliance with the relevant aspects of participation agreements or rules.
Amendments 15 and 16—rules relating to privacy
71. Paragraph 12(c) of the Bill currently requires participation agreements to provide for suspension
or termination of the ability of a party to the agreement to request identity verification services if
the party does not comply with the agreement or access policies for those services. Amendment
15 would amend paragraph 12(c) to add a reference to ‘rules made for the purposes of
subsection 44(1A)’.
72. New subclause 44(1A) will be inserted by Amendment 37, and will empower the Minister to
make rules in order to provide further privacy requirements (in addition to those already in the
Bill) to be met by a party to a participation agreement. It is essential that parties to participation
agreements are required to comply with any privacy requirements that are set out in rules made
under new subclause 44(1A) and that the participation agreement can be suspended or terminated
in circumstances of non-compliance. The amendment to paragraph 12(c) achieves this outcome.
73. Amendment 16 would insert a note to clause 12 clarifying that under subsection 44(1A), the rules
may prescribe requirements relating to privacy with which a party to a participation agreement
must comply.
29
Amendments 17 and 18—timing of participation agreements for DVS
74. Amendment 17 and 18 would amend clause 15 to allow for a longer transition period for entities
using and providing the DVS to move onto participation agreements.
75. Amendment 18 inserts new subsection 15(3) which provides that, for the purposes of
subsection (2), certain requirements do not apply for a time period that is the longer of either:
• 12 months (paragraph 15(3)(a)), or
• up to 18 months if the rules prescribe it (paragraph 15(3)(b)).
76. Amendment 17 reflects this change by omitting ‘12 months’ from subsection 15(2) and
substituting the words ‘the period specified by subsection (3).’
77. Currently, subsection 15(2) of the Bill provides that the requirements for the requesting entity and
the document issuing body to be parties to a participation agreement do not apply in relation to
the DVS within 12 months after the commencement of clause 15. The effect of Amendment 18 is
that the Minister will be able to make rules (as provided by clause 44) to prescribe a longer period
of up to 18 months.
78. Amendment 17 and 18 responds to concerns raised during the Committee’s inquiry by providing
industry with sufficient opportunity to consider and update current operations to comply with the
obligations in participation agreements, without compromising their ability to use the DVS.
79. The DVS is a critical aspect of the day-to-day operations of government and business. It is a
longstanding service which is currently used by over 2,700 government agencies and private
sector organisations, matching against documents provided by more than 20 government
agencies. These entities are party to memoranda of understanding (for government agencies) or
contractual arrangements (for business users) outlining the terms of their participation of the
services.
Amendments 22 and 26—disclosure to integrity agencies
80. Amendments 22 and 26 would further support the oversight and transparency functions of
Commonwealth integrity agencies. The amendments would also implement the Government’s
response to Recommendation 8 of the Committee’s report to allow entrusted persons to disclose
protected information to the Information Commissioner or an OAIC staff member, for the purpose
of the Commissioner or the OAIC exercising a power, or performing a function or duty.
81. Amendment 22 would amend the simplified outline of Part 4 in clause 29, to omit references to an
IGIS official or Ombudsman official and substitute reference to ‘an official of an integrity
agency’. The simplified outline is included to assist readers to understand the substantive
provisions of the Bill and, in this case, reflects the substantive operation of new clause 33, as
inserted by amendment 26, and the removal of the definitions of IGIS official and Ombudsman
official by amendments 4 and 5.
82. Amendment 26 omits the previous authorisations in clauses 33 and 34 allowing entrusted persons
to disclose protected information to an IGIS official or an Ombudsman official. These clauses will
be replaced by a new clause 33 that provides a more comprehensive authorisation allowing
entrusted persons to disclose protected information to a Commonwealth integrity agency for the
purpose of persons in those integrity agencies performing their functions or duties as officials of
those agencies.
30
83. New clause 33 would permit the disclosure of protected information by entrusted persons to any
of the following integrity agencies:
• the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security, or a person covered by
subsection 32(1) of the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act 1986 (new
subparagraph 33(1)(a)(i))
• the Commonwealth Ombudsman, or another officer (within the meaning of
subsection 35(1) of the Ombudsman Act 1976) (new subparagraph 33(1)(a)(ii))
• the Information Commissioner, a member of the staff of the Office of the Information
Commissioner, or a consultant engaged under the Australian Information Commissioner
Act 2010 (new subparagraph 33(1)(a)(iii))
• the National Anti-Corruption Commissioner, or another staff member of the NACC
(within the meaning of the National Anti-Corruption Commission Act 2022) (new
subparagraph 33(1)(a)(iv)), or
• the Inspector of the National Anti-Corruption Commission, or a person assisting the
Inspector (within the meaning of the National Anti-Corruption Commission Act 2022)
(new subparagraph 33(1)(a)(v)).
84. New paragraph 33(1)(b) requires that a disclosure under new paragraph 33(1)(a) must be for the
purpose of that person exercising a power, or performing a function or duty. These officials are
typically entitled to access any information in the course of performing their functions and duties,
reflecting the paramount importance of effective oversight of the public service.
85. Subclauses 30(1) and (2) of the Bill protect personal information by creating criminal offences
applying to current and former entrusted persons, such as current and former departmental
employees, who record, disclose or access protected information (including personal
information). Amendment 26 would provide exceptions to the offences provided for in clause 30.
Amendment 26 adds new subclause 33(2) which makes clear that an entrusted person may make a
record of, or access protected information for the purpose of disclosing the information to an
integrity agency in accordance with new subclause 33(1).
86. The ability for entrusted persons to disclose protected information under new clause 33 is
intended to achieve the following outcomes.
• It will enable the Inspector-General or a person covered by subsection 32(1) of the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act 1986 to obtain information on the use
of the identity verification services by ASIO and ASIS, to assist in carrying out their
oversight duties and functions in relation to those agencies as provided in the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act. This information may include records
of transactions held in the Face Matching Services hub, which are records that will not
contain facial images, biometric templates or any other identification information about
an individual.
• It will support the Commonwealth Ombudsman or another officer within the meaning of
subsection 35(1) of the Ombudsman Act 1976 to perform their functions under the
Ombudsman Act, including investigating complaints, as well as other functions conferred
on the Ombudsman by the Ombudsman Act or any other Commonwealth Act, or any
regulations made under those Acts.
• It will support the Information Commissioner to perform its functions as the independent
national privacy regulator, including its investigation, enforcement and oversight
31
functions under the Privacy Act in relation to the Bill. In particular, Amendment 26
would support the Information Commissioner in performing the annual assessment of the
department’s operation and management of the approved identity verification facilities
required by clause 40 as amended (see amendments 30, 32, and 33). This amendment
implements a recommendation made by the OAIC in its submission to the Senate
Committee’s inquiry into the Bill and the Consequential Amendments Bill.
• It will enable the NACC to obtain relevant information in order to perform its functions
under the National Anti-Corruption Commission Act 2022, including to detect corrupt
conduct and to undertake investigations into serious or systemic corrupt conduct within
the Commonwealth public sector, as well as other functions conferred by the NACC Act
and other Acts. Similarly, new clause 33 is intended to enable the Inspector of the NACC
to obtain relevant information in order to perform its functions under the NACC Act,
including oversight functions and detecting and investigating corrupt conduct within and
relating to the NACC. This recognises the Commissioner’s and Inspector’s functions as
part of the broader Commonwealth integrity framework.
Amendments 30, 32 and 33—annual assessment by Information Commissioner
87. Amendments 30, 32, and 33 would implement the Government’s response to Recommendation 6
of the Committee’s report to amend the Bill to enliven the OAIC’s existing assessment powers in
subsection 33C(1) of the Privacy Act in relation to the annual assessment requirements in
clause 40. Clause 40 of the Bill requires the Information Commissioner to conduct an annual
assessment of the operation and management of the approved identity verification service
facilities. These facilities are the technical components that enable the department to provide the
identity verification services.
88. Amendment 30 would amend the simplified outline of Part 5 in clause 36, to omit references to
the Information Commissioner assessing ‘the operation and management’ of the approved identity
verification facilities. The simplified outline is included to assist readers to understand the
substantive provisions of the Bill and, in this case, reflects the substantive operation of
Amendment 32, which amends the provision that provides the Information Commissioner with
the function of doing an annual assessment.
89. Amendments 32 and 33 would amend clause 40 of the Bill to ensure the annual assessment aligns
with, and leverages, the Information Commissioner’s assessment functions and powers in the
Privacy Act, by:
• omitting paragraph 40(1)(a) of the Bill which states that the Information Commissioner
will assess the operation and management of the approved identity verification facilities
by the Department in the financial year’
• adding new paragraph 40(1)(a) to provide the Information Commissioner with the
function of ‘assessing the approved identity verification facilities in relation to any act or
practice of the Department during the financial year’, and
• omitting subclauses 40(2) and 40(3) of the Bill and substituting new subclause 40(2) to
provide that section 33C(1)(a) of the Privacy Act applies in relation to the annual
assessment.
90. The annual assessment will only relate to the Department, and is not intended to extend to other
parties to a participation agreement (for example, those entities requesting the use of the identity
verification services).
32
91. New paragraph 40(1)(a), inserted by Amendment 32, ensures that the Information Commissioner
will not be limited in determining the scope of its assessment of the approved identity verification
facilities. New paragraph 40(1)(a) is intended to provide certainty that the Information
Commissioner’s annual assessment will be conducted in a manner consistent with existing
privacy assessment function provided at subsection 33C(1) of the Privacy Act.
92. Subsection 33C(1)(a) of the Privacy Act empowers the Information Commissioner to conduct
assessments of APP entities about whether personal information they hold is being maintained
and handled in accordance with the APPs.
93. Amendment 33 omits previous subclauses 40(2) and (3), which required the Secretary of the
Department to ensure there was in place an arrangement with the Information Commissioner for
providing information to the Information Commissioner for making assessments under
subclause 40(1). Previous subclause 40(3) provided that, to avoid doubt, an arrangement made
under previous subclause 40(2) may have been made before, or on or after, the commencement of
clause 40. This provision is no longer required following the removal of subclause 40(2).
94. New subclause 40(2), as inserted by Amendment 33, provides that an assessment under new
subclause 40(1) is taken to be an assessment under paragraph 33C(1)(a) of the Privacy Act.
95. New subclause 40(2) of the Bill allows the Information Commissioner to rely on existing powers
and enforcement mechanisms provided in the Privacy Act to support the conduct of the annual
assessment. This includes powers to require APP entities to provide information or produce a
document where the Commissioner has reason to believe that an entity being assessed has
information or a document relevant to an assessment under section 33C of the Privacy Act. New
subclause 40(2) would also ensure that the Information Commissioner’s assessment function
aligns with the OAIC’s Guide to Privacy Regulatory Action.4
96. Subsection 33C(8) of the Privacy Act provides that the Information Commissioner may publish
the Information Commissioner’s assessments on the OAIC website. As set out in the OAIC’s
Guide to Privacy Regulatory Action,5 the OAIC recognises that there may be circumstances when
it would be inappropriate to publish all or part of an assessment report due to statutory secrecy
provisions or reasons of privacy, confidentiality, commercial sensitivity, security or privilege. The
OAIC will take these factors into account when deciding whether to publish an assessment report
in full or in an abridged version, and the OAIC would generally consult with the relevant target of
the report before publication.
Amendments 31, 34, 35 and 36—interim review
97. Amendments 31, 34, 35 and 36 would implement the Government’s response to Recommendation
11 of the Committee’s report to provide for an interim review of the Bill after 12 months which
focuses on the adequacy of the privacy and security protections and whether there is merit in
developing a civil penalties framework for the identity verification services.
98. Amendment 31 would amend the simplified outline of Part 5 of the Bill in clause 36 to omit
reference to the requirements for a review of the operation of this Act and the provision of
identity verification services to be started within 2 years and for the report to be tabled.
Amendment 31 replaces this with a reference to an interim review and review of this Act being
conducted, both of which must be started within 2 years of the commencement of clause 43 of the
Bill. The simplified outline is included to assist readers to understand the substantive provisions
4 Guide to Privacy Regulatory Action, Chapter 9: Privacy Assessments, available at
https://www.oaic.gov.au/about-the-OAIC/our-regulatory-approach/guide-to-privacy-regulatory-action/chapter-
9-privacy-assessments, published January 2023, accessed November 2023.
5 Guide to Privacy Regulatory Action, Chapter 9: Privacy Assessments, at 9.68.
33
of the Bill and, in this case, reflects the substantive operation of amendments 34, 35 and 36,
which establish the requirement for an interim review and a review of the Act.
99. Amendment 34 omits the heading to clause 43 (previously ‘Review of operation of this Act and
provision of identity verification services’) and replaces it with a new heading reading ‘Interim
review, and review of this Act and provision of identity verification services.’
100. Amendment 35 amends clause 43 of the Bill to insert two new subclauses. New
subclause 43(1A) will require the Minister to cause an interim review of the Act to be started as
soon as practicable after 12 months and before the end of 2 years of the commencement of clause
43. Consistent with clause 2, as amended by Amendment 1, clause 43 will commence the earlier
of the day rules made under clause 44 commence, and, the day after the end of the period of 6
month beginning on the day the Bill receives the Royal Assent).
101. The interim review will occur in addition to the requirement in clause 43 for the Minister to
cause a review of the operation of the Act and the provision of the identity verification services to
be started within 2 years of the commencement of clause 43. A 12-month period is appropriate for
the interim review to be commenced as it will allow sufficient time for the relevant aspects of the
Bill to be established and in operation for a meaningful period before the interim review is
undertaken.
102. New subclause 43(1B) will require the interim review to consider the adequacy and operation
of:
• the privacy protections contained in the Act (new paragraph 43(1B)(a)) – this may
include, but would not be limited to, consideration of:
o the privacy obligations of parties to participation agreements (clauses 9 and 10 of
the Bill)
o the data breach notification requirements in relation to the NDLFRS hosting
agreement (provided at subclauses 13(3) and (4))
• the security requirements and obligations contained in the Act (new paragraph 43(1B)(b))
– this may include, but would not be limited to, consideration of:
o the requirement for the Department to maintain the security of identification
information included in a database in the NDLFRS, including by encrypting the
information (paragraph 13(4)(a))
o the requirement for the Department to maintain the security of electronic
communications to and from the approved identity verification facilities,
including by encrypting the information (paragraph 25(a))
o the requirement for the Department to protect the information from unauthorised
interference or unauthorised access (paragraph 25(b)), and
• the penalties for non-compliance with obligations set out in participation agreements,
including consideration of whether civil penalties should apply to any such
non-compliance (new paragraph 43(1B)(c))
103. Amendment 36 would insert a new subclause 43(2A) setting out consultation requirements
for both the interim review (under subclause 43(1A)) and the 2 year review (under subclause
43(1)).
34
104. Under new subclause (2A), the following persons must be consulted in relation to the interim
review and 2 year review:
• the President of the Australian Human Rights Commission appointed under section 8A of
the AHRC Act
• the Human Rights Commissioner appointed under section 8B of the AHRC Act, and
• the Information Commissioner appointed under section 14 of the Australian Information
Commissioner Act 2010 (Cth).
105. This consultation requirement will provide an opportunity for the reviews to be informed by
expert views about matters that relate to human rights, including the privacy.
106. Amendment 36 also ensures that the interim review will be subject to the same requirements
for consultation, preparation and tabling as provided in subclauses 43(2) and (3) for the 2-year
review. Subclauses 43(2) and (3) provide that the Minister must:
• cause a report of each review to be prepared and given to the Minister, and
• cause a copy of each report to be tabled in each House of the Parliament within 15 sitting
days of that House after the Minister receives the report.
Amendments 37 and 38—rules relating to privacy
107. Amendment 37 would implement the Government’s response to Recommendation 9 of the
Committee’s report to amend clause 44 of the Bill to require the Information Commissioner to be
consulted on rules, as they relate to privacy, before they are made under clause 44.
108. Clause 44 currently allows the Minister to, by legislative instrument, make rules prescribing
matters:
• required or permitted by this Bill to be prescribed by the rules, or
• necessary or convenient to be prescribed for carrying out or giving effect to the Bill.
109. Amendment 37 would amend clause 44 to insert new subclause 44(1A), which clarifies that,
without limiting existing subclause 44(1), the rules may prescribe requirements relating to privacy
with which a party to a participation agreement must comply (in addition to those already in the
Bill). This ensures rules can be made to prescribe additional privacy requirements in response to
an annual assessment by the Information Commissioner (conducted under clause 40 of the Bill),
or to address operational issues that may require further privacy safeguards for entities seeking to
request the use of the identity verification services.
110. Amendment 37 inserts new paragraph 44(1B)(a), which requires that, before making or
amending any rules under subclause 44(1), the Minister must undertake public consultation on
proposed rules with the public.
111. New subparagraphs 44(1B)(a)(i) and (ii) require the Minister to cause a notice to be published
on the department’s website:
• setting out the draft rules or amendments, and
35
• inviting persons to make submissions to the Minister about the draft rules or amendments
within the period specified in the notice, which must be at least 28 days after the notice is
published.
112. Amendment 37 also inserts new paragraph 44(1B)(b), which requires that any rules that deal
with matters relating to privacy functions (within the meaning of the Australian Information
Commissioner Act 2010) must be subject to consultation with the Information Commissioner.
Under the Bill, as amended by Amendment 37, the Minister can make rules in relation to the
following privacy matters:
• requirements relating to privacy within which a party to a participation agreement must
comply (new subclause 44(1A) as inserted by Amendment 37)
• prescribing government authorities for the purposes of paragraph 9(1)(d)
• prescribing state or territory privacy laws for the purposes of becoming a party
participation agreement under subparagraph 9(1)(b)(ii), and
• prescribing state or territory privacy laws for the purposes of becoming a party to the
NDLFRS hosting agreement under subparagraph 12(2)(a)(ii).
113. Amendment 37 also inserts new paragraph 44(1B)(c) which requires the Minister to consider
any submissions received within the period specified. This obliges the Minister to consider any
submissions from the public on draft rules or amendments, as well as submissions from the
Information Commissioner where the rules deal with matters relating to privacy functions. The
Minister may also consider submissions received after the specified period if the Minister
considers it appropriate to do so (new subclause 44(1C)).
114. The purpose of Amendment 37 is to establish a framework to support genuine and meaningful
consultation with the public on any rules that are proposed to be made under subclause 44(1). The
period of 28 days ensures the public are given a reasonable opportunity to consider and, if desired,
make submissions in relation to, proposed rules or amendments. This will enable industry and
other users of the identity verification services to provide input and scrutinise proposed rules to be
made which may impact the operation of the services and fees charged to those entities that seek
to request use of the services.
115. These amendments do not preclude or limit any other consultations undertaken to support the
development of rules under the Bill. In particular, section 17 of the Legislation Act 2003
(Cth) requires that, before making a legislative instrument, the instrument-maker must be satisfied
that appropriate consultation, as is reasonably practicable, has been undertaken in relation to a
proposed instrument.
116. Amendment 38 inserts a new sub-heading reading ‘Disallowance and sunsetting of rules’
before subclause 44(3), which serves to clarify that section 42 (disallowance) and Part 4 and
Chapter 3 (sunsetting) of the Legislation Act 2003 applies to the rules.
36
Identity Verification Services (Consequential Amendments) Bill 2023
Amendment 1—Commencement
1. Amendment 1 amends clause 2 of the Consequential Amendments Bill, which provides for
the commencement of each provision in the Consequential Amendments Bill as set out in the table.
2. Amendment 1 amends clause 2 of the Consequential Amendments Bill (table item 1), by
inserting in item (b) ‘section 24 of’ before ‘the Identity Verification Services Act 2023’.
3. Amended item 1 of the table provides that the whole of the Consequential Amendments Bill
will commence on the day that is the later of:
(a) the start of the day after the Bill receives Royal Assent, or
(b) the commencement of section 24 of the Identity Verification Services Act 2023.
4. Section 24 of the proposed Identity Verification Services Act 2023 (the proposed Act)
provides authority for the Department to develop, operate and maintain the approved identity
verification facilities. This would provide authority for the Department to establish the information
technology solutions for the approved identity verification facilities, operate them in accordance with
the requirements of the proposed Act and maintain them on an ongoing basis. Therefore it is
appropriate that the Consequential Amendments Bill does not commence unless section 24 of the
proposed Act has commenced.
5. However, as noted in Item 1, the provisions in the Consequential Amendments Bill do not
commence if section 24 of the proposed Act does not commence. This reflects that the amendment in
the Consequential Amendments Bill is intended to support the operation of the identity verification
services provided for in the proposed Act.
37
UD100.
2022-2023
The Parliament of the
Commonwealth of Australia
THE SENATE
Identity Verification Services Bill 2023
(Government)
(1) Clause 2, page 2 (table item 1), omit “The day after this Act receives the Royal
Assent”, substitute “The day after the end of the period of 3 months beginning on the day this
Act receives the Royal Assent”.
[commencement]
(2) Clause 5, page 8 (lines 9 to 12), omit the definition of IGIS official.
[disclosure to integrity agencies]
(3) Clause 5, page 9 (lines 9 to 13), omit the definition of Ombudsman official.
[disclosure to integrity agencies]
(4) Clause 6, page 14 (after line 6), at the end of the clause, add:
Identification information taken to be personal information
(6) Identification information is taken to be personal information for the purposes of the
Privacy Act 1988.
[identification information]
(5) Clause 7, page 15 (line 9), omit “consent”, substitute “express consent”.
[express consent]
(6) Clause 9, page 16 (line 32), omit “consent”, substitute “express consent”.
[express consent]
(7) Clause 9, page 17 (line 7), omit “consent”, substitute “express consent”.
[express consent]
(8) Clause 9, page 17 (line 23), at the end of subclause (2), add:
; and (g) the Department to notify each party to the agreement that is relevant to, or impacted
by, a data breach of which the Information Commissioner is informed under
paragraph (f); and
(h) each party notified under paragraph (g) of a data breach, that is impacted by that
breach, to take reasonable steps to notify each individual to whom the identification
information relates.
[notification of data breaches]
1
B23UD100.v20.docx 10/11/2023 6:05 PM
(9) Clause 9, page 17 (line 25), omit “consent”, substitute “express consent”.
[express consent]
(10) Clause 9, page 18 (after line 9), at the end of the clause, add:
(4) A participation agreement must provide that a party to the agreement is not authorised to
use or disclose identification information obtained for the purposes of requesting or
providing identity verification services for the purposes of any of the following:
(a) engaging in activities that would allow the party to create a data profile of the
person whose identity is being verified (including where it would allow the person’s
behaviour to be tracked (whether or not online));
(b) offering to supply goods or services;
(c) advertising or promoting goods or services;
(d) enabling another person or entity to offer to supply goods or services;
(e) enabling another person or entity to advertise or promote goods or services;
(f) market research.
[further limitations on use of identification information]
(11) Page 19 (after line 12), after clause 10, insert:
10A Failure to comply with participation agreements
(1) This section applies if:
(a) a party to a participation agreement is subject to the Privacy Act 1988; and
(b) an act or practice of the party, relating to personal information about an individual,
does not comply with a requirement of:
(i) the agreement in relation to a matter covered by section 9 or 10 (other than
paragraph 10(1)(b)) of this Act; or
(ii) rules prescribed for the purposes of subsection 44(1A) of this Act.
(2) For the purposes of the Privacy Act 1988, the act or practice is taken to be:
(a) an interference with the privacy of the individual; and
(b) covered by sections 13 and 13G of that Act.
[failure to comply with participation agreements]
(12) Clause 12, page 19 (line 29), after “agreement”, insert “, rules made for the purposes of
subsection 44(1A),”.
[rules]
(13) Clause 12, page 19 (after line 30), at the end of the clause, add:
Note: Under subsection 44(1A), the rules may prescribe requirements relating to privacy with which a
party to a participation agreement must comply.
[rules]
(14) Clause 29, page 35 (lines 20 and 21), omit “an IGIS official or Ombudsman
official”, substitute “an official of an integrity agency”.
[disclosure to integrity agencies]
(15) Clause 29, page 35 (line 22), omit “consent”, substitute “express consent”.
[express consent]
2
B23UD100.v20.docx 10/11/2023 6:05 PM
(16) Clauses 33 and 34, page 39 (lines 1 to 15), omit the clauses, substitute:
33 Information communicated etc. to integrity agencies
(1) An entrusted person may disclose protected information if:
(a) the disclosure is to any of the following persons:
(i) the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security, or a person covered by
subsection 32(1) of the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act
1986;
(ii) the Commonwealth Ombudsman, or another officer (within the meaning of
subsection 35(1) of the Ombudsman Act 1976);
(iii) the Information Commissioner, a member of the staff of the Office of the
Information Commissioner, or a consultant engaged under the Australian
Information Commissioner Act 2010;
(iv) the National Anti-Corruption Commissioner, or another staff member of the
NACC (within the meaning of the National Anti-Corruption Commission Act
2022);
(v) the Inspector of the National Anti-Corruption Commission, or a person
assisting the Inspector (within the meaning of the National Anti-Corruption
Commission Act 2022); and
(b) the disclosure is for the purpose of that person exercising a power, or performing a
function or duty.
(2) An entrusted person may make a record of or access protected information for the
purpose of disclosing the protected information under subsection (1).
[disclosure to integrity agencies]
(17) Clause 35, page 39 (line 20), omit “consented”, substitute “expressly consented”.
[express consent]
(18) Clause 35, page 39 (line 30), omit “consents”, substitute “expressly consents”.
[express consent]
(19) Clause 36, page 41 (lines 10 and 11), omit “the operation and management of”.
[annual assessment by Information Commissioner]
(20) Clause 36, page 41 (lines 16 to 18), omit “A review of the operation of this Act and the
provision of identity verification services must be started within 2 years. A report of the
review must be tabled in Parliament.”, substitute “An interim review and review of this Act
must be conducted, both of which must be started within 2 years of the commencement of this
Act.”.
[interim review]
(21) Clause 40, page 43 (lines 13 to 15), omit paragraph (1)(a), substitute:
(a) assessing the approved identity verification facilities in relation to any act or
practice of the Department during the financial year;
[annual assessment by Information Commissioner]
(22) Clause 40, page 43 (lines 17 to 22), omit subclauses (2) and (3), substitute:
(2) For the purposes of the Privacy Act 1988, an assessment under subsection (1) of this
section is taken to be an assessment under paragraph 33C(1)(a) of that Act.
3
B23UD100.v20.docx 10/11/2023 6:05 PM
[annual assessment by Information Commissioner]
(23) Heading to clause 43, page 46 (lines 18 and 19), omit “Review of operation of this Act and
provision of identity verification services”, substitute “Interim review and review of this
Act”.
[interim review]
(24) Clause 43, page 46 (before line 20), before subclause (1), insert:
(1A) The Minister must cause an interim review to be started as soon as practicable after 12
months, and before the end of 2 years, of the commencement of this section.
(1B) The interim review must consider the adequacy and operation of:
(a) the privacy protections contained in this Act; and
(b) the security requirements and obligations contained in this Act; and
(c) the penalties for non-compliance with obligations set out in participation
agreements, including considering whether civil penalties should apply.
[interim review]
(25) Clause 43, page 46 (line 23), omit “the review”, substitute “a review under subsection (1A) or
(1)”.
[interim review]
(26) Clause 44, page 47 (after line 4), after subclause (1), insert:
(1A) Without limiting subsection (1), the rules may prescribe requirements relating to privacy
with which a party to a participation agreement must comply.
(1B) Before making or amending any rules under subsection (1), the Minister must:
(a) cause to be published on the Department’s website a notice:
(i) setting out the draft rules or amendments; and
(ii) inviting persons to make submissions to the Minister about the draft rules or
amendments within the period specified in the notice (which must be at least
28 days after the notice is published); and
(b) if the rules deal with matters that relate to the privacy functions (within the meaning
of the Australian Information Commissioner Act 2010)—consult the Information
Commissioner; and
(c) consider any submissions received within the specified period.
(1C) The Minister may consider any submissions received after the specified period if the
Minister considers it appropriate to do so.
[rules]
4
B23UD100.v20.docx 10/11/2023 6:05 PM
