—s

The Hon Michelle Rowland MP

Attorney-General
Federal Member for Greenway
Reference. MS26-000120

Senator the Hon Sue Lines
President of the Senate
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

Dear President

I am writing to convey the Government’s response to the Senate Foreign Affairs, Defence and
Trade Legislation Committee’s report on the National Commissioner for Defence and Veteran
Suicide Prevention Bill 2020 [provisions] and the National Commissioner for Defence and
Veteran Suicide Prevention (Consequential Amendments) Bill 2020 [provisions], which predates
the 47" Parliament.

The Government notes each recommendation of the report. However, given the passage of time
since the report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.

I would also like to take this opportunity to outline some developments relevant to the
Committee’s report and recommendations. The interim Office of the National Commissioner
was established in 2020 while legislation was developed to provide legal basis for the National
Commissioner (the National Commissioner for Defence and Veteran Suicide Prevention Bill
2020). The Office was formally decommissioned in October 2021 in response to the
establishment of the Royal Commission into Defence and Veteran Suicide (the Royal
Commission), and the legislation lapsed with the dissolution of the Senate ahead of the

2022 federal election.

Following the conclusion of the Royal Commission’s inquiry, the Government tabled the
Australian Government Response to the Final Report of the Royal Commission into Defence and
Veteran Suicide (the Government Response) on 9 December 2024, which is available here:
https://www.dva.gov.au/documents-and-publications/governments-response-royal-commissions-
final-report. As part of the Government Response, the Defence and Veterans’ Service
Commission has been established to oversee and drive ongoing suicide prevention reform across
the Defence ecosystem.

Please accept this letter as the Government’s response to the Committee’s report. A copy of this
letter has also been provided to Senator Raff Ciccone, Chair of the Senate Standing Committee
on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade Legislation Committee.

Yours sincerely

Michelle Rowland MP
(2/ 312026

cc. Senator Raff Ciccone, Chair, Senate Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade Legislation Committee

The Hon Michelle Rowland MP
PO Box 6022, Parliament House Canberra
Suite 101C, 130 Main Street, Blacktown NSW 2148 | (02) 9671 4780
