The Hon Michelle Rowland MP

Attorney-General
Federal Member for Greenway
Reference. MS26-000120

Senator the Hon Sue Lines
President of the Senate
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

Dear President

I am writing to convey the Government’s response to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs
Legislation Committee’s report on the Family Law Amendment (Financial Agreements and
Other Measures) Bill 2015, which predates the 47" Parliament.

The Government notes each recommendation of the report. However, given the passage of time
since the report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.

I would also like to take this opportunity to outline some developments relevant to the
Committee’s report and recommendations. The Government has implemented significant
reforms through three Acts of Parliament since 2023.

The Family Law Amendment Act 2023 (Cth) commenced on 6 May 2024 and made changes to
the Family Law Act 1975 (Cth) (Family Law Act) to ensure that the best interests of children are
prioritised and placed at the centre of the family law system. This included changes to streamline
the legislative framework for making parenting orders, including refining the list of ‘best
interest’ factors and enhancing consideration of family violence. The amendments also created
new harmful proceedings provisions to limit systems abuse by perpetrators and protect
victim-survivors from being retraumatised through the misuse of family law court processes.

The Family Law Amendment Act 2024 (Cth) commenced on 10 June 2025, enabling separating
couples to better understand the property decision-making framework that is used by the courts,
and to ensure the effect of family violence is taken into account as part of determining a property
settlement.

The Family Law Amendment (Information Sharing) Act 2023 (Cth) (Information Sharing Act)
commenced on 6 May 2024, giving effect to key aspects of the National Strategic Framework for
Information Sharing between the Family Law and Family Violence and Child Protection
Systems (National Framework). The Information Sharing Act provides the family law courts
with the power to issue information sharing orders in child-related proceedings to quickly seek
information from child protection, police and firearms agencies about family violence,

child abuse and neglect that could place children at risk. These changes to the Family Law Act
are supported by the Family Law Amendment (Information Sharing) Regulations which
introduced new prescribed information sharing safeguards.

The Hon Michelle Rowland MP
PO Box 6022, Parliament House Canberra
Suite 101C, 130 Main Street, Blacktown NSW 2148 | (02) 9671 4780

On 6 September 2024, National Cabinet agreed to a $4.7 billion package to accelerate action to
deliver on Australia’s National Plan to End Violence Against Women and Children 2022- 2032
to end gender-based violence in a generation. This included funding to expand the National
Framework to include property-only and maintenance proceedings, as well as proceedings under
Part 3 of the Family Law (Child Abduction) Regulations 1986 for ‘incoming’ cases initiated in
the family law courts.

Please accept this letter as the Government’s response to the Committee’s report. A copy of this
letter has also been provided to Senator Jana Stewart, Chair of the Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee.

Yours sincerely

Michelle Rowland MP

(2) F026

Ce. Senator Jana Stewart, Chair of the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation
Committee
