Attorney-General
Federal Member for Greenway

Reference. MS26-000120

Senator the Hon Sue Lines
President of the Senate
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

Dear President

I am writing to convey the Government’s response to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs
Legislation Committee report on the Family Law Amendment (Federal Family Violence Orders)
Bill 2021 [Provisions], which predates the 47" Parliament.

The Government notes each recommendation of the report. However, given the passage of time
since the report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.

I would also like to take this opportunity to outline some developments relevant to the
Committee’s report and recommendations. On 24 March 2021, the Family Law Amendment
(Federal Family Violence Order) Bill 2021 (the 2021 Bill) was introduced. The 2021 Bill sought
to allow the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia and the Family Court of Western
Australia to make final Federal Family Violence Orders (FF VOs), under a final order-only
framework, for the personal protection of a child, a parent of a child, a person who is to spend
time with, communicate with, or live with a child, a person who has parental responsibility for a
child, or a party to a marriage from family violence, in specified circumstances. The 2021 Bill
lapsed with the prorogation of the 46th Parliament.

The Government has also implemented significant reforms through three Acts of Parliament
since 2023. The Family Law Amendment Act 2023 (Cth) commenced on 6 May 2024 and made
changes to the Family Law Act 1975 (Cth) (Family Law Act) to ensure that the best interests of
children are prioritised and placed at the centre of the family law system. This included changes
to streamline the legislative framework for making parenting orders, including refining the list of
‘best interest’ factors and enhancing consideration of family violence. The amendments also
created new harmful proceedings provisions to limit systems abuse by perpetrators and protect
victim-survivors from being retraumatised through the misuse of family law court processes

The Family Law Amendment Act 2024 (Cth) commenced on 10 June 2025, enabling separating
couples to better understand the property decision-making framework that is used by the courts,
and to ensure the effect of family violence is taken into account as part of determining a property
settlement.

The Family Law Amendment (Information Sharing) Act 2023 (Cth) (Information Sharing Act)
commenced on 6 May 2024, giving effect to key aspects of the National Strategic Framework for
Information Sharing between the Family Law and Family Violence and Child Protection
Systems (National Framework).

The Hon Michelle Rowland MP
PO Box 6022, Parliament House Canberra
Suite 101C, 130 Main Street, Blacktown NSW 2148 | (02) 9671 4780

The Information Sharing Act provides the family law courts with the power to issue information
sharing orders in child-related proceedings to quickly seek information from child protection,
police and firearms agencies about family violence, child abuse and neglect that could place
children at risk. These changes to the Family Law Act are supported by the Family Law
Amendment (Information Sharing) Regulations which introduced new prescribed information
sharing safeguards.

The Attorney-General’s Department is active in pursuing better law and justice outcomes with
the states and territories through forums such as the Police Ministers Council and the Standing
Council of Attorneys-General. A current priority of the Attorney-General’s Department,

to progress through these forums, is a review of domestic violence order frameworks across all
jurisdictions, including penalties, definitions, gaps and inconsistencies, as well as opportunities
for improvement.

Please accept this letter as the Government’s response to the Committee’s report. A copy of this
letter has also been provided to Senator Jana Stewart, Chair of the Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee.

Yours sincerely

ae ee

Michelle Rowland MP
(2 1 p06

Ge, Senator Jana Stewart, Chair of the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation
Committee
