Australian Government response to the
Environment and Communications References
Committee report:
Middle Arm Industrial Precinct
March 2026
The Australian Government notes the report by the Environment and Communications References
Committee (the Committee) into the Middle Arm Industrial Precinct, tabled in the Senate on
21 August 2024.
The Committee was not able to reach agreement on a unanimous set of recommendations, and
presented a total of 31 individual recommendations from Committee members. With the exception
of recommendations related to matters that are the responsibility of the Northern Territory
(NT) Government, the Australian Government’s response to recommendations raised by Senators is
contained below.
The Committee’s report reflects that planning for the project by the NT Government remains at an
early stage. A range of the matters raised by the Committee will be considered through ongoing
regulatory and assurance processes by respective governments.
The Australian Government remains committed to its $1.5 billion planned equity investment to
support the development of common user infrastructure at the Middle Arm Sustainable
Development Precinct (Middle Arm) in the NT. A final investment decision by the Australian
Government will be made in due course, in accordance with the requirements of the
Commonwealth Investment Framework, and informed by Infrastructure Australia’s evaluation of the
business case.
The project is subject to the outcomes of Strategic Environmental Assessments being undertaken
under the Environmental Protection Act 2019 (NT) (EP Act) and the Environment Protection and
Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (Commonwealth) (EPBC Act).
Middle Arm is expected to deliver transformational impacts for Darwin, the NT and Australia.
The Australian Government’s investment will pave the way for Middle Arm to be a globally
competitive, sustainable precinct, that takes advantage of new economic opportunities and delivers
sustainable jobs for the future. Our funding will underpin infrastructure that supports industries
critical to meet our commitment to Net Zero –including hydrogen and the manufacture and export
of lithium batteries, and the project will be enabled by a growing renewable energy industry.
The Middle Arm Precinct is an investment in economic infrastructure that will also generate income
for the NT Government, to support its ability to be self-sustaining, and the Australian Government
through taxation revenues.
The Australian Government will continue to work with the NT Government to deliver the best
possible outcomes for communities, industries and the environment.
