Attorney-General
Federal Member for Greenway

Reference. MS26-000120

Senator the Hon Sue Lines
President of the Senate
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

Dear President

I am writing to convey the Government’s response to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs
References Committee report on The performance and integrity of Australia's administrative
review system, which predates the 47" Parliament.

The Government notes each recommendation of the report. However, given the passage of time
since the report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.

I would also like to take this opportunity to outline some developments relevant to the
Committee’s report and recommendations. The Government reformed Australia’s administrative
review system to ensure it is transparent, user-focused, efficient, accessible and fair following
recommendations from the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee in March 2022.
The Administrative Review Tribunal (ART) commenced on 14 October 2024, replacing the
former Administrative Appeals Tribunal.

These recommendations have been effectively implemented through the design of key features
of the ART under the Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024 including:

e auser-focused design, including simpler and consistent processes, and an emphasis on
non-adversarial approaches to resolving applications;

e asuite of powers and procedures to respond flexibly to changing caseloads;

e mechanisms to identify, escalate and report on systemic issues in administrative decision-
making (including through the re-established Administrative Review Council and the
establishment of a guidance and appeals panel);

e asimple membership structure with clear qualification requirements and role descriptions
for each level of membership;

e clear and delineated roles and responsibilities for those who hold leadership positions in
the Tribunal;

e atransparent and merit-based appointment process for members; and

e powers for the President to manage the performance, conduct, and professional
development of members.

The Hon Michelle Rowland MP
PO Box 6022, Parliament House Canberra
Suite 101C, 130 Main Street, Blacktown NSW 2148 | (02) 9671 4780

Please accept this letter as the Government’s response to the Committee’s report. A copy of this
letter has also been provided to Senator Leah Blyth, Chair of the Senate Legal and Constitutional
Affairs References Committee.

Yours sincerely

AM . ho 2

Michelle Rowland MP

(2 / $/2026

Ce, Senator Leah Blyth, Chair of the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References
Committee
