Dy = a iy 4
“7 7x Pesta 78S

The Hon Michelle Rowland MP

Attorney-General
Federal Member for Greenway
Reference: MS26-000189

Senator the Hon Sue Lines
President of the Senate
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

Dear President

I am writing to convey the Government’s response to the Joint Standing Committee on Foreign
Affairs, Defence and Trade’s Second Interim Report: freedom of religion and belief, the
Australian experience, which predates the 47"* Parliament.

The Government notes each recommendation of the report. However, given the passage of time
since the report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.

Every Australian, no matter their race or religion, should be able to enjoy their life in any
Australian community, without prejudice or discrimination. Commonwealth anti-discrimination
laws make it unlawful to discriminate on the basis of protected attributes including age,
disability, race, sex, intersex status, gender identity, and sexual orientation in certain areas of
public life.

The Government recognises the important role that faith-based schools play in our education
system and the community. We remain committed to ensuring a balance between protecting
students and teachers from discrimination and allowing schools to continue to operate in
accordance with their religious ethos. It is the Government’s view that this reform requires a
bipartisan approach to proceed in a way that unites, rather than divides, our community.

Please accept this letter as the Government’s response to the Committee’s report. A copy of this
letter has also been provided to the Hon Milton Dick MP, Speaker of the House of
Representatives, and to the Hon Shayne Neumann MP, Chair of the Joint Standing Committee
on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade.

Yours sincerely

Michelle Rowland MP

[G 13 12026

cc. | The Hon Milton Dick MP, Speaker of the House of Representatives
The Hon Shayne Neumann MP, Chair of the Joint Standing Committee on Foreign
Affairs, Defence and Trade

The Hon Michelle Rowland MP
PO Box 6022, Parliament House Canberra
Suite 101C, 130 Main Street, Blacktown NSW 2148 | (02) 9671 4780
