DDp7/el Laie eer
4ST 28

The Hon Michelle Rowland MP

Attorney-General
Federal Member for Greenway
Reference: MS26-000189

Senator the Hon Sue Lines
President of the Senate
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

Dear President

I am writing to convey the Government’s response to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs
Legislation Committee’s report on the Social Media (Anti-Trolling) Bill 2022 [Provisions],
which predates the 47" Parliament.

The Government notes each recommendation of the report. However, given the passage of time
since the report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.

The Australian Government recognises the impact of harm that occurs online—including
emotional, mental health and financial harms that can result where malicious online trolls post
defamatory material to attack a person's reputation. The prevalence and spread of this content is
a borderless challenge that demands coordinated action. The Australian Government is actively
implementing responses to tackle this digital dimension and to create a safer digital environment
for Australians of all ages. This includes:

e Imposing social media age restrictions - As of 10 December 2025, age-restricted social
media platforms need to take reasonable steps to prevent Australians under the age of 16
from creating or keeping an account. The social media age restrictions aim to protect
young Australians from pressures and risks that users can be exposed to while logged in
to social media accounts. These come from design features that encourage them to spend
more time on screens, while also serving up content that can harm their health and
wellbeing.

e Ensuring criminal responses to conduct are fit for purpose — including passing
amendments to outlaw the practice of 'doxxing', or the malicious release of personal data
online, and strengthening offences targeting the creation and non-consensual sharing of
sexually explicit material online.

Please accept this letter as the Government’s response to the Committee’s report. A copy of this
letter has also been provided to Senator Jana Stewart, Chair of the Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee.

Yours sincerely

Michelle Rowland MP
[& /2 r026

Ce, Senator Jana Stewart, Chair of the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation
Committee

The Hon Michelle Rowland MP
PO Box 6022, Parliament House Canberra
Suite 101C, 130 Main Street, Blacktown NSW 2148 | (02) 9671 4780
