Attorney-General
Federal Member for Greenway

Reference: MS26-000189

Senator the Hon Sue Lines
President of the Senate
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

Dear President

Iam writing to convey the Government’s response to the Senate Finance and Public
Administration Legislation Committee’s report on the National Integrity (Parliamentary
Standards) Bill 2019, which predates the 47" Parliament. The Government notes each
recommendation of the report. However, given the passage of time since the report was tabled,
a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.

I would also like to take this opportunity to outline some developments relevant to the
Committee’s report and recommendations. The Parliamentary Workplace Support Service
(PWSS) was established on 1 October 2023, as an independent statutory agency to drive cultural
change, enhance safety, and provide HR support across Commonwealth parliamentary
workplaces. It was introduced to implement recommendations from the Set the standard: Report
on the Independent Review into Commonwealth Parliamentary Workplaces (Set the

Standard report)(https://humanrights.gov.au/__data/assets/file/0022/46633/Ahre_set_the_standar
d_2021.pdf), addressing serious issues like bullying, harassment, and sexual assault by offering
trauma-informed support, confidential reporting, and independent workplace reviews.

Enforceable behaviour standards and codes of conduct for Commonwealth Parliamentary
Workplaces (CP Ws) were formally introduced in February 2023, following the Set the
Standard report. These standards mandate that parliamentarians and staff act with integrity,
respect, and safety, prohibiting bullying, harassment, and sexual misconduct. The Independent
Parliamentary Standards Commission (IPSC)(www.ipsc.gov.au/), established in October 2024,
now oversees these codes.

Additionally, the National Anti-Corruption Commission Act 2022 established the National
Anti-Corruption Commission which commenced operations on | July 2023. The National
Anti-Corruption Commission (the Commission) is an independent Commonwealth agency able
to detect, investigate and report on serious or systemic corrupt conduct in the Commonwealth
public sector, which includes parliamentarians and their offices.

Finally, I would like to note that a government response to the Select Committee into the
Political Influence of Donations Report was tabled on 14 May 2024.

The Hon Michelle Rowland MP
PO Box 6022, Parliament House Canberra
Suite 101C, 130 Main Street, Blacktown NSW 2148 | (02) 9671 4780

Please accept this letter as the Government’s response to the Committee’s report. A copy of this
letter has also been provided to Senator Karen Grogan, Chair of the Senate Finance and Public
Administration Legislation Committee.

Yours sincerely

Ae ae

Michelle Rowland MP
(s G / 3 12026

oC Senator Karen Grogan, Chair of the Senate Finance and Public Administration
Legislation Committee
