THE HON MATT KEOGH MP
MINISTER FOR VETERANS’ AFFAIRS
MINISTER FOR DEFENCE PERSONNEL

Senator the Hon Sue Lines
President of the Senate
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

Dear President, Sa e,

GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO THE INQUIRY INTO THE PROVISIONS OF THE
DEFENCE AMENDMENT (DEFENCE HONOURS AND AWARDS APPEALS
TRIBUNAL) BILL 2025

Pursuant to Standing Order 166, relating to the presentation of documents when the Senate is
not sitting, I present to you the Government Response to the Foreign Affairs, Defence and
Trade Legislation Committee Report into the provisions of the Defence Amendment
(Defence Honours and Awards Appeals Tribunal) Bill 2025.

Yours faithfully,
HON MATT an
(2 13 12026
Encl
Parliament House a Telephone: 02 6277 7820
CANBERRA ACT 2600 minister@dva,gov.au

Ngunnawal and Ngambri Country

GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO THE INQUIRY INTO THE DEFENCE
AMENDMENT (DEFENCE HONOURS AND AWARDS APPEALS TRIBUNAL)
BILL 2025

On 4 September 2025, the Senate referred the provisions of the Defence Amendment
(Defence Honours and Awards Appeals Tribunal) Bill 2025 (the Bill) to the Senate Foreign
Affairs, Defence and Trade Legislation Committee for report by 30 October 2025.

On 28 October 2025, the Senate agreed to extend the reporting date to 21 November 2025.
The Committee tabled its final report on 21 November 2025.

The intent of the Bill was to contemporise the Defence Honours and Awards Appeals
Tribunal (the Tribunal). The Bill proposed to add provisions that would limit reviewable
decisions to service undertaken within 20 years of the end of an operation in the case of
Defence honours and operational service awards, and in the case of length of service awards
when the affected person turned or would have turned 100 years of age. Other provisions
defined who could apply to the Tribunal regarding a reviewable decision and the scope of
Tribunal recommendations.

The Bill was crafted to respond to concerns raised by the Tribunal itself in its decisions and
annual reports on the risks associated with decisions being made when it is difficult, if not
impossible to refer to objective and independent evidence. Importantly, the Committee and
other relevant stakeholders did support some elements of the Government’s proposed
legislative reform of the Tribunal’s operations. This included: the introduction of an effective
timeline for seeking a review of a Defence decision; the ability to create procedural rules for
the Tribunal; clarifying the scope of recommendations the Tribunal can make; and clarifying
the powers of the Tribunal for decisions associated with Defence honours and awards.

The report made two recommendations, namely that:

1. | That the Department of Defence undertakes further consultations with the Defence
Honours and Awards Appeals Tribunal, ex-service organisations and other relevant
stakeholders, regarding subsection 110V(2) of the Bill relating to the 20-year limitation
on reviewable decisions and section 110VA of the Bill relating to the standing
provisions.

2. That the Senate defer its consideration of the Bill until the Department of Defence
concludes and makes public the outcome of its consultations.

The Government accepts both of these recommendations. To give effect to this, the
Government discharged the Bill from the Senate on 24 November 2025.

The Government notes the remaining recommendations put forward from the Australian
Greens, the Jacqui Lambie Network and Senator David Pocock’s respective dissenting
reports. The Government does not agree with the recommendation put forward in the
Coalition’s dissenting report.

The Government thanks the Committee for its work on this Inquiry, as well as those who
provided submissions and appeared at hearings.
