THE SENATE
BILLS
National Anti-Corruption Commission
Bill 2022, National Anti-Corruption
Commission (Consequential and
Transitional Provisions) Bill 2022
Second Reading
SPEECH
Monday, 28 November 2022
BY AUTHORITY OF THE SENATE
Monday, 28 November 2022 THE SENATE 2326
SPEECH
Date Monday, 28 November 2022 Source Senate
Page 2326 Proof No
Questioner Responder
Speaker Gallagher, Sen Katy Question No.
Senator GALLAGHER (Australian Capital Territory—Minister for the Public Servic e, Minister for Finance,
Minister for Women, Manager of Government Business in the Senate and Vice-President of the Executive
Council) (13:29): I table a revised explanatory memorandum relating to the bills and move:
That these bills be now read a second time.
I seek leave to have the second reading speeches incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The speeches read as follows—
NATIONAL ANTI-CORRUPTION COMMISSION BILL 2022
Ahead of the election on 21 May the Australian Labor Party pledged that if the Australian people gave us the
honour of governing this nation, we would repay their trust by returning integrity, honesty and accountability
to government.
Labor told Australians that if we were elected we would legislate a National Anti-Corruption Commission this
year.
This Government is honouring that commitment.
Today I introduce legislation to establish a powerful, transparent and independent National Anti-Corruption
Commission.
This Government takes its commitments seriously.
And we are serious about restoring trust and integrity to government.
This legislation delivers the single biggest integrity reform this parliament has seen in decades.
It honours our commitment to Australians in both form and substance.
The design principles we announced before the election are the design principles of the bill before the Senate.
These design principles were developed with some of Australia's leading integrity advocates.
They were endorsed by the Australian people at the election.
The Government is also pleased they have been endorsed by many crossbench members in the other place and
in the Senate.
The Government thanks the Joint Select Committee on National Anti-Corruption Commission legislation for its
consideration of the Bill. The Government supports all six of the Committee's recommendations to amend the
Bill and so moved amendments to implement them. The other place has passed the Bill with those amendments.
The National Anti-Corr uption Commission
The National Anti-Corruption Commission will operate independently of government and have broad jurisdiction
to investigate serious or systemic corrupt conduct across the Commonwealth public sector.
CHAMBER
Monday, 28 November 2022 THE SENATE 2327
It will have the power to investigate ministers, parliamentarians and their staff, statutory officer holders,
employees of all government entities, and contractors.
It will have discretion to commence inquiries on its own initiative or in response to referrals from anyone,
including members of the public and whistleblowers. Referrals can be anonymous.
It will be able to investigate both criminal and non-criminal corrupt conduct, and conduct occurring before or
after its establishment.
It will have the power to hold public hearings.
It will also have a mandate to prevent corruption and educate Australians about corruption.
A Parliamentary Joint Committee will oversee the Commission and will be empowered to require the
Commission to provide information about its performance.
Broader integrity re forms
The Commission will form part of Australia's broader integrity framework.
The Albanese Government is committed to strengthening this framework to improve standards of integrity across
the public sector.
We have established robust codes of conduct for ministers and ministerial staff and we are working across the
Parliament to implement the Set the Standard Report from Sex Discrimination Commissioner Kate Jenkins.
We are committed to enhancing transparency and integrity of political donations.
We are also committed to ensuring that Australia has effective protections for whistleblowers. The Attorney-
General will be introducing a Bill into Parliament before the end of this year which will make priority
amendments to the Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013 (PID Act). These amendments deliver on the
Government's election commitment to implement key recommendations of the 2016 review of the PID Act by
Mr Philip Moss AM and other parliamentary committee reports and will ensure immediate improvements are
made to the public sector whistleblower scheme before the Commission commences operation.
The Attorney-General is also working with the Minister for Finance to ensure Commonwealth agencies take
measures to prevent, detect and deal with corruption by creating new requirements in the Public Governance,
Performance and Accountability Rule.
The Bill
The National Anti-Corruption Commission aims to eliminate corruption in the federal public sphere, and restore
trust and transparency in our democratic institutions.
The Commission will be able to investigate serious or systemic corrupt conduct affecting any part of the federal
public sector.
The definition of corrupt conduct is central to the Commission's jurisdiction. It is consistent with key elements
of existing definitions at the state and territory level and in the Commonwealth Law Enforcement Integrity
Commissioner Act 2006.
It encompasses conduct by a public official that involves an abuse of office, breach of public trust or misuse
of information.
It also includes conduct by any person that could adversely affect the honest or impartial exercise of a
Commonwealth public official's functions.
Other conduct that could adversely affect public administration, such as external fraud, will continue to be dealt
with by existing integrity agencies.
This will ensure the Commission is not diverted from its core purpose of tackling serious or systemic corruption.
CHAMBER
Monday, 28 November 2022 THE SENATE 2328
There are well-established and effective arrangements for dealing with fraud and other crimes that affect
Commonwealth interests.
For example, in the last three years, the AFP's dedicated Fraud Command has undertaken 261 investigations into
serious or complex frauds, and the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions has prosecuted over 1400
fraud matters referred by the AFP and 30 other agencies in the same period.
The Commission will be the lead Commonwealth agency for the investigation of serious or systemic corruption,
and will work in partnership with other agencies that form part of the Commonwealth's broader integrity
framework, including the Australian Federal Police and the Australian Public Service Commission.
The Commission will have the power to refer corruption issues to other Commonwealth, state and territory
agencies for their consideration—for example, where an issue involves broader criminality or official misconduct
that falls within the jurisdiction of another independent agency.
The Commission's powers and thresholds for using them
The Commission will have a full suite of powers similar to those of a Royal Commission.
It will be able to use its powers to undertake an investigation into a corruption issue if the Commissioner is of
the opinion that it could involve serious or systemic corrupt conduct.
Importantly, the Commission will be able to undertake preliminary inquiries using powers to compel the
production of information.
This will enable the Commission to determine whether an allegation could be serious or systemic.
The Commission will be able to hold public hearings in exceptional circumstances and if satisfied it is in the
public interest to do so. The default position is that hearings will be held in private.
The legislation provides guidance to the Commission on factors that may be relevant to determining the public
interest in holding a public hearing.
These factors include any unfair prejudice to a person's reputation, privacy, safety or wellbeing if the hearing
were to be held in public.
These factors also include the benefit of making the public aware of corrupt conduct.
Reporting
At the end of an investigation, the Commission will be required to produce a report containing findings and
recommendations.
It will be able to make findings of corrupt conduct, but not of criminal guilt as this is a matter for a court to
determine.
Where a public hearing has been held, a report will be tabled in Parliament. Other reports will be published by
the Commissioner where that is in the public interest.
Prevention and education functions
The legislation gives the Commission the function of providing education and information about corrupt conduct
and preventing that conduct.
The Commission will provide guidance and information to support the public sector to understand the concept
of corrupt conduct, and to identify and address vulnerabilities to corruption.
This work will be informed by the insights the Commission draws from its investigations and the intelligence
it collects about corruption.
CHAMBER
Monday, 28 November 2022 THE SENATE 2329
The Commission will also engage in broader public education about its role, corruption risks, and avenues to
report corrupt conduct.
The Commission's independence
The independence of the Commission will be secured in a number of ways.
The Commission will be able to conduct investigations on its own initiative or in response to referrals or
allegations from any source.
Agency heads will be required to report any corruption issue in their agency to the Commission if they suspect
it could be serious or systemic.
The appointment of the Commissioner, Deputy Commissioners and the Inspector will be subject to approval by
the Parliamentary Joint Committee. The appointees will have limited terms and security of tenure comparable
to a federal judge.
Oversight of the Commission
The Commission will be overseen by a Parliamentary Joint Committee, and an Inspector.
The Parliamentary Joint Committee will be multi-partisan; comprising 12 members—3 government, 2 opposition
and 1 crossbench member from each chamber.
The Committee will be responsible for approving the appointments of the Commissioner, the Deputy
Commissioners and the Inspector.
The Committee will be able to review and report to both Houses of Parliament on the sufficiency of the
Commission's budget. The Committee will also be able to review the Commission's performance and its annual
reports.
The Inspector will deal with any corruption issues arising in the Commission, complaints about the Commission,
and will review and determine the extent of compliance with the law by the Commission when exercising the
power to issue a summons or arrest warrant.
Protections and safeguards
The legislation also ensures that there are appropriate safeguards against undue reputational damage, and provides
protections for whistleblowers and journalists.
Reputational safeguards
There will be an express ability for the Commissioner to make public statements at any time to avoid damage
to a person's reputation.
The Commission will be able to clarify the capacity in which a witness is appearing at a public hearing.
Reports on investigations will include statements that a person has not engaged in corrupt conduct or is not the
subject of any findings, where that is appropriate to avoid damage to the person's reputation.
The Commission must afford procedural fairness to individuals or agencies who are the subject of any adverse
findings it proposes to include in a report by providing them a reasonable opportunity to respond.
Whistleblower protections
The legislation provides strong protections for whistleblowers against adverse consequences, including criminal
offences and immunities.
Public officials making disclosures to the Commission will also be protected under the Public Interest Disclosure
Act 2013 (PID Act).
CHAMBER
Monday, 28 November 2022 THE SENATE 2330
The Attorney-General will be introducing a Bill into Parliament before the end of this year improve whistleblower
protections, with the aim of having these reforms in place when the Commission commences operation.
Protections for journalists
The protections for journalists include an exemption from answering questions or providing information that
would enable the identity of a source to be ascertained.
Political parties and parliamentarians
Political parties and activities are an important part of our democracy, and this legislation recognises existing
rules for political and parliamentary activities.
The legislation makes it clear that the use of public resources to conduct parliamentary business in accordance
with the Parliamentary Business Resources Act 20 17 or the Members of Parliament (Staff) Act 1984 is not within
the Commission's jurisdiction.
It also confirms that political activities that do not involve or affect the exercise of powers or functions by a
public official, or the use of public resources, cannot constitute corrupt conduct.
The Commission will only be able to investigate a matter that falls within the jurisdiction of the Independent
Parliamentary Expenses Authority (IPEA) or the Australian Electoral Commission (AEC) if IPEA or the AEC
refer the matter to the Commission.
Before referring the matter, those authorities would need to form a view that the information raises a corruption
issue that could be serious or systemic.
The legislation also expressly preserves parliamentary privilege by providing that it does not affect the powers,
privileges or immunities of each House of the Parliament.
Funding
The Albanese Government has committed substantial funding of $262 million over four years for the
establishment and ongoing operation of the Commission.
This funding will ensure the Commission has the staff, capabilities and capacity to triage referrals and allegations
it receives, conduct timely investigations, and undertake corruption prevention and education activities.
Conclusion
In conclusion, I would like to acknowledge, on behalf of the Government, the constructive engagement on this
Bill from my Cabinet and Caucus colleagues, the Opposition, members of the crossbench in the other place and
the Senate; and also acknowledge the efforts of those in the other place who kept up the pressure in the last
Parliament, especially the Member for Indi.
With this Bill, the Albanese Government is fulfilling its election commitment to establish a powerful, transparent
and independent National Anti-Corruption Commission. In doing so, we have the support of the Australian
people. We look forward to the support of this Parliament.
NATIONAL ANTI-CORRUPTION COMMISSION
(CONSEQUENTIAL AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS) BILL 2022
The National Anti-Corruption Commission (Consequential and Transitional Provisions) Bill makes
consequential amendments to the Commonwealth statute book to support the establishment of the National Anti-
Corruption Commission (the Commission).
This Bill ensures the Commission has key investigative powers, such as the ability to obtain warrants to use
surveillance devices and intercept telecommunications when investigating criminal corrupt conduct, consistent
with current arrangements for the Australian Commission for Law Enforcement Integrity.
CHAMBER
Monday, 28 November 2022 THE SENATE 2331
The Government moved amendments in the other place to provide that the Commission's warrants and orders
under the Surveillance Devices Act 2004 and Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979 will be
issued by superior court judges. The other place has passed the Bill with those amendments.
The Bill also ensures information can be shared with and by the Commission under other Acts for the purposes
of carrying out its functions.
The Bill repeals the Law Enforcement Integrity Commissioner Act 2006, and provides transitional arrangements
for the continuation of investigations and inquiries being conducted by the Australian Commission for Law
Enforcement Integrity following the establishment of the Commission.
The Commission will be able to complete those investigations or inquiries either under the Law Enforcement
Integrity Commissioner Act 2006, or under the National Anti-Corruption Commission Bill if they could involve
corrupt conduct that is serious or systemic.
Finally, this Bill gives the Commission and certain State anti-corruption and investigative commissions access
to the industry assistance framework under Part 15 of the Telecommunications Act 1997.
The ability to obtain technical assistance from communications industry participants will support those agencies'
exercise of investigative powers to investigate serious, criminal corrupt conduct.
Debate interrupted.
CHAMBER
