THE SENATE
PROOF
BILLS
Administrative Review Tribunal and
Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2025
Second Reading
SPEECH
Wednesday, 4 February 2026
BY AUTHORITY OF THE SENATE
Wednesday, 4 February 2026 THE SENATE 24
SPEECH
Date Wednesday, 4 February 2026 Source Senate
Page 24 Proof Yes
Questioner Responder
Speaker Green, Sen Nita Question No.
Senator GREEN (Queensland—Assistant Minister for Tourism, Assistant Minister for Pacific Island Affairs
and Assistant Minister for Northern Australia) (11:34): I thank all senators who have contributed to this debate.
The Administrative Review Tribunal and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2025 supports the tribunal to
deliver efficient and high-quality reviews of government decisions. The bill enhances the tribunal's powers and
procedures so that merits review processes are proportionate and efficient. Efficient and timely decision-making
is particularly important in the context of the tribunal's review of migration decisions, such as reviews of decisions
to review visas.
Delays in decision-making can cause backlogs, which creates an access-to-justice issue for genuine visa
applicants while incentivising non-genuine applicants to apply for a merits review in order to extend their stay.
The bill supports the tribunal by expanding its ability to make decisions based on written materials without
holding an oral hearing. The government has considered the report of the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs
Legislation Committee following the inquiry into the bill. The government agrees with recommendations 1(b) and
2 of the committee's report and will be proposing amendments to the bill to implement those recommendations.
The bill itself would amend the Migration Act 1958 to require the tribunal to make decisions without conducting
an oral hearing in reviews of certain migration decisions—specifically, decisions to refuse to grant a student
visa. Subject to the passage of government amendments, the new procedure would only apply to reviews of
temporary visa decisions prescribed in regulations. The proposed amendments give effect to recommendation
2 of the committee's report. The committee recommended 'that the government consider amending the bill to
require a decision to refuse to grant a student visa to be prescribed in order to be an "application to be reviewed on
the papers"'. The government's intention is that student visa refusal matters will be the first visa type prescribed
to be subject to this process.
Reviews of temporary visas such as student visas are suitable to be determined on the papers, and that's having
regard to a couple of things: the nature of the issues of the review, the short-term nature of these visa times, and
the low volume and complexity of relevant materials. Applications would still be required to be reviewed on
the papers. They would be subject to a new review procedure set out in the Migration Act. The review would
be conducted entirely on the basis of written materials without the tribunal having to hold an oral hearing. That
means that the applicants would be given the opportunity to present their cases in writing. There would be no
limit on the information that they would be able to present to the tribunal to support their case.
Key features of this review procedure include requiring the tribunal to invite an applicant to give the tribunal
written submissions and evidence on certain matters relating to the issues under review; requiring the tribunal
to give certain information to an applicant and allow the applicant to comment on it; enabling an applicant to
request the department to provide access to material given to the tribunal for the purposes of the review; retaining
the tribunal's ability to request or obtain additional documents or materials by other means; and requiring the
tribunal to make its decision after considering any submissions, evidence and comments given by the applicant
and any other material that's given to the tribunal without holding an oral hearing.
The bill would also amend the ART Act to give the tribunal additional flexibility to make a decision based on
written materials and without holding an oral hearing in relation to other kinds of cases. The tribunal would be
able to do so if it appears to the tribunal that issues can be adequately determined in the absence of the parties and
it would be reasonable in the circumstances to make a decision without holding a hearing. This new discretion
recognises that whether procedural fairness requires an oral hearing will depend on the circumstances of each
case. It will ensure that simple matters with straightforward issues can be determined as efficiently as possible,
enabling a proportionate allocation of tribunal resources. An important safeguard is that, before deciding to
dispense with an oral hearing, the tribunal must consult the parties about this and take the party's submissions
into account.
CHAMBER
Wednesday, 4 February 2026 THE SENATE 25
The government will propose amendments that would implement recommendation 1(b) of the committee's
report. The committee recommended that the government consider, in consultation with the ART, 'amending the
bill to further improve the operational efficiency of the tribunal'. These amendments would give effect to the
recommendation by enabling a non-judicial deputy president to be appointed to act as the president when the
president is absent or unable to perform the duties of the office for a period of up to three weeks. The committee
also recommended that the government consider, in consultation with the ART, amendments that might assist
the president to better and more efficiently carry out their functions—for example, by expanding the powers that
may be delegated to a deputy president.
The government proposes amendments that would enable the president to delegate certain powers related to
the management of member performance and conduct to non-judicial deputy presidents. It is appropriate for
non-judicial deputy presidents to be able to exercise these powers in association with their existing functions
for the management of member performance and conduct. The government has considered the committee's
recommendations that the government consider amendments that would give the tribunal greater flexibility to
provide oral instead of written reasons while ensuring that the tribunal is required to provide written reasons if a
party to a proceeding requests them. The government will further consider and consult on this recommendation.
The government has also considered dissenting reports through the committee process, and the government
disagrees with the recommendations in those reports. Recommendation 2 of the dissenting report from the
Australian Greens is that the government restore legal funding for applicants in the ART for review of
migration decisions. The processes and procedures of the tribunal are designed to promote an informal, less-
adversarial tribunal environment to reflect that a large number of applicants across this varied jurisdiction are
self-represented. Recommendation 3 of that report also recommends that the Department of Home Affairs
urgently review its decision-making procedure to allow for natural justice for applicants, including an express
opportunity to provide evidentiary material to reduce the unreasonable case load of the ART. I can say that the
department is taking steps to support continuous improvements in its decision-making processes. This includes
implementing recommendations of the Commonwealth Ombudsman, learning from a merits review report in
relation to incorporating tribunal outcomes in continuously improving processes.
The Administrative Review Tribunal has a crucial role in enabling members of the community to seek fair, quick
and inexpensive review of government decisions. This bill further strengthens the tribunal by empowering it with
the tools necessary to make decisions in an efficient and timely manner while also ensuring that applicants have
a meaningful opportunity to present their case to the tribunal.
The ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT ( Senator Chandler ): The question is that the bill be now read a
second time.
CHAMBER
