COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES
House of Representatives
Official Hansard
Thursday, 29 February 2024
FORTY-SEVENTH PARLIAMENT
FIRST SESSION—FIFTH PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Thursday, 29 February 2024 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 1571
policy for your health and it is good policy for your hip pocket. Our responsible economic management is working
in Australia.
The DEPUTY SPEAKER (Ms Claydon): The time for the discussion has now concluded.
COMMITTEES
Petitions Committee
Report
Ms TEMPLEMAN (Macquarie) (16:08): I present report No. 22 of the Standing Committee on Petitions.
The report read as follows—
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
PETITIONS COMMITTEE
REPORT No. 22
Ministerial Response
29 February 2024
MEMBERS OF THE COMMITTEE
Chair Ms Susan Templeman MP
Deputy Chair Mr Ross Vasta MP
Mr Sam Birrell MP
Ms Alison Byrnes MP
Ms Lisa Chesters MP
Mr Garth Hamilton MP
Ms Tracey Roberts MP
Ms Meryl Swanson MP
This committee is supported by staff of the Department of the House of Representatives
Report summarising the ministerial response being presented.
The committee met in private session in the 47th Parliament on 28 February 2024.
1. The following ministerial response to a petition was received:
From the Minister for Indigenous Australians to a petition regarding the Anindilyakwa Land Council (PN0579)
Ms Susan Templeman MP
Chair—Petitions Committee
PETITIONS
Responses
Ms TEMPLEMAN (Macquarie) (16:08): by leave—I present a ministerial response to a petition.
Anindilyakwa Land Council
Dear Chair
Thank you for your correspondence of 12 February 2024 referring PN0579 in relation to Anindilyakwa Land Council (ALC).
I expect strong governance and accountability from all Land Councils. Ensuring strong governance of the Anindilyakwa
Land Council is important for the Anindilyakwa people.
That's why I have asked NIAA's Integrity Group to examine the matters you have raised and determine appropriate action,
including investigation or referral to relevant Commonwealth and Territory agencies.
I have also asked the ALC for regular updates about the implementation of the ANAO recommendations.
Yours sincerely
from the Minister for Indigenous Australians, Ms Burney
BILLS
Crimes Legislation Amendment (Combatting Foreign Bribery) Bill 2023
Consideration of Senate Message
Bill returned from the Senate with amendments.
Ordered that the amendments be considered immediately.
Senate's amendments—
CHAMBER
1572 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES Thursday, 29 February 2024
(1) Clause 2, page 2 (table item 1), omit "3", substitute "4".
(2) Page 2 (after line 11), after clause 3, insert:
4 Review of operation of amendments
(1) The Minister must cause a review of the operation of the amendments made by this Act to be conducted as soon as
practicable after the end of the period of 18 months starting on the day Part 2 of Schedule 1 to this Act commences.
(2) The persons who conduct the review must give the Minister a written report of the review.
(3) The Minister must cause a copy of the report of the review to be tabled in each House of the Parliament within 15
sitting days of that House after the Minister receives the report.
Mr DREYFUS (Isaacs—Attorney-General and Cabinet Secretary) (16:09): I move:
That the amendments be agreed to.
The amendments adopted by the Senate provide for a statutory review of the measures introduced by this bill. After
18 months, a review will ensure that the measures introduced and debated today can be assessed after an appropriate
period of time and guarantee that companies engaged in serious criminal wrongdoing, like foreign bribery, feel the
full force of the law.
Question agreed to.
COMMITTEES
Law Enforcement Joint Committee
Report
Mr LLEW O'BRIEN (Wide Bay) (16:10): On behalf of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Law
Enforcement, I present the following reports: Examination of the Australian Federal Police Annual Report 2022-
23 and Examination of the Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission Annual Report 2022-23.
Reports made parliamentary papers in accordance with standing order 39(e).
Mr LLEW O'BRIEN: by leave—I rise as the deputy chair of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Law
Enforcement to speak on the committee's reports examining the Australian Federal Police's annual report for 2022-
23 and the Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission's annual report for 2022-23. I'm pleased to report that the
committee did not identify any major issues of concern about the AFP's annual report.
As Australia's national policing agency, the AFP protects Australians and Australia's interests. Some key
achievements in 2022-23 include the seizure of 30 tonnes of illicit drugs and precursors at the border or domestically,
avoiding $11 billion in harm; the seizure of 66 tonnes of illicit drugs by overseas police with AFP assistance,
avoiding $10.9 billion in harm; and 373 people being charged with criminal offences, with 141 people charged as a
result of child exploitation investigations. The committee recently tabled its report on its inquiry into law
enforcement capabilities in relation to child exploitation. At its public hearings on the AFP's annual report, the
committee sought updated information on this area.
The committee spoke to the AFP about the triage system in the AFP led Australian Centre to Counter Child
Exploitation, the ACCCE. The committee was also advised that the ACCCE were working in partnership with their
state and territory counterparts, through the joint anti-child-exploitation teams, to prioritise reports and respond
rapidly. The committee also asked about the status of Operation Tenterfield, including support for victims and their
families, given the large number of victims involved. Operation Tenterfield is an AFP investigation which has led
to a former childcare worker being charged with 1,623 child abuse offences against 91 children. While the matter
is before the Brisbane Magistrates Court, the committee was advised that a communications network has been set
up to keep the victims informed of progress in proceedings. The committee also heard that the ACCCE has a number
of partnerships with non-government organisations across the country and internationally which can provide support
to victims of these heinous crimes. The AFP Commissioner stressed that end-to-end encryption will make the job
of police more difficult, including in relation to child exploitation. The committee shares this concern about the
effect of end-to-end encryption on social media and reporting child exploitation, as well as emerging effects of
artificial intelligence, and will continue to monitor these areas.
I wish to take the opportunity to thank all those officers working to combat child exploitation. It is a very difficult
area of work, and the dedication of these officers to protect children in Australia and overseas is at the absolute
highest level and is extremely impressive. In 2019, the AFP commissioner set a five-year target of $600 million for
criminal assets restrained. The committee was pleased to hear of the success of the Criminal Assets Confiscation
Taskforce, which, as at 30 June 2023, has restrained in excess of $940 million in assets. The committee also heard
about the innovation paths being pursued by the criminal assets team, including in relation to child protection
offences.
CHAMBER
2022-2023
THE PARLIAMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
CRIMES LEGISLATION AMENDMENT (COMBATTING FOREIGN BRIBERY)
BILL 2023
ADDENDUM TO THE EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM
(Circulated by authority of the
Attorney-General, the Hon Mark Dreyfus KC MP)
CRIMES LEGISLATION AMENDMENT (COMBATTING FOREIGN BRIBERY)
BILL 2023
The purpose of this addendum is to provide additional clarifying material to the Explanatory
Memorandum for the Crimes Legislation Amendment (Combatting Foreign Bribery)
Bill 2023 (the Bill).
This addendum responds to Recommendation 1 of the Senate Legal and Constitutional
Affairs Legislation Committee (the Committee) in its report on the Bill published on 26 July
2023. The Committee recommended that the Government consider amending the Bill or the
Bill’s explanatory memorandum with respect to proposed section 70.5Ato clarify that the fact
that foreign bribery has occurred does not, in itself, mean that adequate procedures were not
implemented by the relevant body corporate.
GENERAL OUTLINE
1. On page 3, insert the following new paragraph:
6A. The defence is intended to encourage a body corporate to establish,
implement and maintain adequate procedures designed to prevent foreign
bribery. If a body corporate can demonstrate that it had adequate procedures
to prevent foreign bribery in place, the body corporate would obtain the
benefit of the defence set out at subsection 70.5A(5). The defence is intended
to apply in circumstances where a body corporate can demonstrate that it
had, in place, adequate procedures to prevent the commission of an offence
against section 70.2 by any associate of the body corporate (or, where the
associate was engaging in conduct outside of Australia that, if engaged in in
Australia, would constitute an offence against section 70.2). In such
circumstances, the mere fact that an associate of a body corporate has
engaged in foreign bribery does not, of itself, mean that adequate procedures
designed to prevent the commission of the offence were not implemented by
the respective body corporate.
2. Consideration of whether a body corporate has ‘adequate procedures designed to
prevent’ foreign bribery should be focused on processes undertaken by a body
corporate to prevent foreign bribery, including whether they align with adequate
procedures guidance, rather than solely on the actions by associates of the body
corporate.
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Schedule 1 – Amendments relating to foreign bribery
Item 8 – After paragraph 112
1. After paragraph 112 of the Explanatory Memorandum, insert the following new
paragraph:
112A. If a body corporate can demonstrate that it had adequate procedures designed
to prevent foreign bribery in place, the body corporate would obtain the
benefit of the defence set out at subsection 70.5A(5), despite foreign bribery
2
occurring. In such circumstances, the mere fact that an associate of a body
corporate has engaged in foreign bribery does not, in itself, mean that
adequate procedures designed to prevent the commission of the offence were
not implemented by the relevant body corporate. The adequate procedures
guidance, which will be published by the Minister, will outline steps a body
corporate can take to put in place adequate procedures designed to prevent
foreign bribery. If a body corporate can demonstrate it had such procedures
in place, having regard to the guidance, a court may find that it had adequate
procedures designed to prevent foreign bribery. When considering ‘adequate
procedures’, a body corporate should therefore focus on whether the policies
and procedures it has in place are effective in preventing foreign bribery.
2. This additional material provides clarity on the intended purpose of the new
subsection 70.5A(5), in that a body corporate would obtain the benefit of the defence
if it can demonstrate it had in place adequate procedures designed to prevent the
commission of the foreign bribery, as outlined in paragraph 99 of the Explanatory
Memorandum.
3. The defence is intended to be read as a whole and, as outlined in paragraph 101 of the
Explanatory Memorandum, what constitutes ‘adequate procedures’ would be
determined by the courts on a case by case basis.
4. Further to the outline in paragraph 101 of the Explanatory Memorandum, the
defendant can provide whatever evidence is appropriate in the circumstances to
demonstrate to the court that it had in place adequate procedures to prevent the
commission of foreign bribery. Whether procedures to prevent foreign bribery are
adequate in the circumstances must be determined on a case by case basis and may
depend on a range of actors, including the size of the relevant body corporate. As
noted in the Explanatory Memorandum, imposing the legal burden on the body
corporate creates a strong positive incentive for corporations to adopt measures to
prevent foreign bribery.
5. Ensuring that a body corporate focus on whether policies and procedures in place are
effective in influencing actions and behaviour, beyond their mere existence, addresses
observations from the United Kingdom in recent foreign bribery prosecution. For
example, a generic ethics policy may not demonstrate that a body corporate had
adequate procedures designed to prevent foreign bribery. Likewise, where a body
corporate implements adequate procedure following an offence by its associate, it
may not retrospectively obtain the benefit of the defence in subsection 70.5(A)(5). A
body corporate should therefore undertake due diligence in preparing its adequate
procedures to prevent foreign bribery.
3
