Australian Government response to the Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights report on the Inquiry into
antisemitism at Australian universities
TABLING MARCH 2026
Overview
The Australian Government welcomes the opportunity to respond to the Parliamentary
Joint Committee on Human Rights (PJCHR) report on its inquiry into Antisemitism at
Australian universities.
On 29 October 2024, the Australian Government referred the issue of antisemitism at
Australian universities to the PJCHR for inquiry and asked the Committee to provide
advice on steps that Australian universities and the sector can take to better protect
Jewish students and staff from further harm. The PJCHR released its inquiry report on
12 February 2025 and made 10 recommendations.
The Australian Government agrees or agrees in principle with all 10 of the Committee’s
recommendations. The Australian Government notes the Committee’s findings and
recommendations complement a range of Government initiatives underway.
The evil act of terrorism and antisemitism perpetrated at Bondi Beach on 14 December,
the first night of Chanukah, was an attack on Jewish Australians and an attack on all
Australians.
We grieve for those whose lives were taken, we stand with their loved ones and friends.
We vow that from this tragedy Australia will emerge stronger, more united and safer for
all who call our nation home.
While antisemitism and extremism can lead to violence, violence is not the beginning of
the harm they do. Abuse, prejudice and discrimination can take a devastating toll on
the wellbeing of individuals and communities.
The Australian Government is fully committed to eradicating the root causes of
antisemitism, extremism and prejudice, as well as working to prevent their terrible
consequences.
That is why the Australian Government has established the Antisemitism Education
Taskforce (the Taskforce), chaired by David Gonski AC.
The purpose of the Taskforce is to help the Australian education system prevent, tackle
and properly responds to antisemitism. This includes relevant elements of the Plan to
Combat Antisemitism developed by Australia’s Special Envoy to Combat Antisemitism,
Jillian Segal AO.
The Taskforce includes Australia’s Special Envoy to Combat Antisemitism and
representatives from across the Australian education system: including early childhood
education and care, schools and universities. Representation on the taskforce include:
the Australian Children’s Education & Care Quality Authority, representatives of state
and territory educational authorities, non-government schools, Universities Australia,
Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Agency (TEQSA) and the interim Australian
Tertiary Education Commission.
Response to the recommendations | 2
Initial areas of priority include implementation of the measures outlined below and
identification of further measures needed to ensure the Australian education system is
able to prevent, tackle and properly respond to antisemitism.
The Taskforce builds on a range of accelerated investments and new initiatives to
tackle antisemitism in schools, including:
 a focused review of elements of the Australian Curriculum to identify
opportunities to strengthen its capacity to support: a rejection of all forms of
antisemitic thought and antisemitic actions, a deep understanding of Jewish
Australians’ history and culture, and a mature understanding and expression of
Australian values;
 supporting the expansion of the Special Envoy’s United Nations Educational
Scientific and Cultural Organization teacher training into schools across
Australia;
 extending and expanding the funding for Together for Humanity over 4 years to
continue its work to build intercultural understanding and social cohesion in
schools; and
 providing teachers and schools a new hub with access to free high-quality
resources and guidance to strengthen social cohesion in schools, and combat
antisemitism through new online resources.
The Taskforce also builds on a range of accelerated investments and new initiatives to
tackle antisemitism in universities, including:
 strengthening the powers and penalties of TEQSA to ensure it is able to step in
and act when it is justified in the public interest;
 strengthening Commonwealth higher education regulation to ensure institutions
demonstrate a commitment to addressing racism, and ensuring the Tertiary
Education Quality and Standards Agency can monitor compliance;
 supporting the Monash Initiative for Rapid Research into Antisemitism (MIRRA)
to expand its training program to deliver training to university staff and
leadership on recognising antisemitism in universities across Australia;
 in February 2026, the Special Envoy attended the Education Ministers Meeting to
provide an update on the Plan to address antisemitism and support a discussion
about the role of the education system and school communities;
 establishing the Expert Council on University Governance which has provided
the Education Ministers Meeting with principles to ensure universities are safe
and welcoming;
 tasked the Australian Human Rights Commission to undertake the Respect at
Uni Study, led by Race Discrimination Commissioner Mr Giridharan Sivaraman.
The Study examines the prevalence, nature, and impact of individual and
systemic racism in Australian universities and is engaging in significant
consultation with university students and staff;
Response to the recommendations | 3
 appointing the National Student Ombudsman, a free and impartial service to
investigate complaints from students, including antisemitism or any other forms
of racism; and
 developing and releasing TEQSA Statement of Regulatory Expectations: Student
grievance and complaint mechanisms on 3 October 2025 in the context of
protests on university campuses.
Further information
TEQSA has also published a Sector Alert on Managing External Actors on Campus. This
advice informs providers on management of risks presented by external actors, and
provides a range of strategies and responses.
The Australian Government has conducted a review of the Tertiary Education Quality
and Standards Agency Act 2011 (TEQSA Act) reflecting its commitment to ensuring the
higher education regulatory system is student-centred and meets contemporary
student and community expectations. The review engaged a wide range of sector
stakeholders to understand current and future challenges and ensure the regulatory
framework is fit for purpose into the future.
The Australian Government has established the independent National Student
Ombudsman (NSO) to investigate and resolve student complaints about universities,
including complaints by Jewish students or about antisemitism. The NSO commenced
operations on 1 February 2025 and will provide guidance to universities to improve their
complaints-handling practices. The NSO has strong investigative powers and can make
recommendations to a provider about the actions that should be taken to resolve a
complaint. The NSO has the power to monitor a provider’s implementation of its
recommendations, as well as share information with relevant regulators to provide the
basis for potential compliance action where necessary.
If a provider does not take appropriate action in response to NSO recommendations,
the NSO is able to provide the Minister for Education with a copy of an investigation
report for tabling in Parliament. The NSO reports annually on complaint volumes,
complaints outcomes and compliance with recommendations.
In response to the Australian Universities Accord, the Australian Government
commissioned the AHRC to undertake a Respect at Uni: Study into Antisemitism,
Islamophobia, racism, and the experience of First Nations People, led by Race
Discrimination Commissioner, Mr Giridharan Sivaraman.
The final report was published on 17 February 2026. The report draws on the experience
of 76,000 university staff and students and was developed in consultation with
stakeholder groups and education providers.
Response to the recommendations | 4
The Australian Government has established a Royal Commission on Antisemitism and
Social Cohesion, which will be led by former Justice of the High Court, the Hon Virginia
Bell AC. The terms of reference for the Royal Commission include tackling antisemitism
by investigating the nature and prevalence of antisemitism in institutions and society,
and its key drivers in Australia, including ideologically and religiously motivated
extremism and radicalisation.
Hearing from the Jewish Australian community will be important to informing
recommendations from the Royal Commission relating to educational cultural
institutions, and other sectors of Australian society. The Royal Commission will deliver
an interim report to Government by 30 April 2026 and a final report by 14 December
2026.
Response to the recommendations | 5
Responses to recommendations
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights report on the
Inquiry into antisemitism at Australian universities
No. Recommendation Response
1 The committee recommends that university Vice Chancellors hold Agree
a formal meeting with Jewish student bodies and Jewish staff
during semester one of 2025 to engage directly on their
observations regarding antisemitism on their campuses. The
committee recommends that Vice Chancellors should
subsequently make a public comment on their work to combat
antisemitism and regarding those meetings with Jewish students
and staff.
2 The committee recommends that Australian universities should Agree
review their complaints procedures with a view to their
simplification, including giving particular consideration to:
establishing a single central office to receive and process all
complaints; adopting a clear definition of antisemitism that aligns
closely with the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance
definition; and providing for alternative dispute resolution
mechanisms.
3 The committee recommends that Australian universities should Agree
report on the outcome of complaints in a more transparent
manner while maintaining the privacy of the complaints process.
The committee recommends that such reports should include,
where relevant, comment by the Vice Chancellor regarding their
work to address antisemitism on campus.
4 The committee recommends that the government give Agree
consideration as to whether it is necessary to amend the Fair Work
Act 2009 to enable disciplinary or other action to be taken in
relation to an employee (or a grant recipient where the Australian
Research Council Act 2001 and related legislation applies), where
that person is found to have engaged in conduct which would
breach Part 5.1 of the Criminal Code Act 1995, or section 18C of
the Racial Discrimination Act 1975.
5 The committee recommends that Australian universities should Agree
publish regular de-identified reports setting out the number of
complaints received, the nature of the complaints, the number of
complaints resolved since the last report and the timeframe for
the resolution of outstanding complaints.
Response to the recommendations | 6
6 The committee recommends that universities consider increased Agree
investment in research into antisemitism and opportunities for
collaboration regarding current projects, having close regard to
the work being undertaken by the Monash University Australian
Centre for Jewish Civilisation as an appropriate model.
7 The committee recommends that universities deliver ongoing Agree
training to students, staff and leadership on recognising and
addressing antisemitism.
8 The committee recommends that the government give Agree
consideration to amending the Tertiary Education Quality and
Standards Agency Act 2011 to provide TEQSA with enhanced
powers to enforce compliance with the higher education threshold
standards relating to student wellbeing and safety, as those
standards are applied in practice by universities (e.g. through
Codes of Conduct).
9 The committee recommends that government monitor the Agree-in
implementation of these recommendations and further principle
recommends that the National Student Ombudsman review
university practices to reduce antisemitism on campuses within
twelve months of the tabling of this report.
10 The committee recommends that if, following a review of the Agree-in
implementation of these recommendations in consultation with principle
the Special Envoy to Combat Antisemitism, it is apparent that the
response by universities has been insufficient, the government
should give consideration to the establishment of a judicial
inquiry.
Response to the recommendations | 7
Coalition Additional Comments
Recommendation 1. That the government establish an independent judicial inquiry
into antisemitism at Australian universities immediately
The Australian Government acknowledges the range of views presented to the inquiry
and notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government's response, as outlined above, reflects the range of actions
the Government is taking to respond to the issues raised in this inquiry.
Recommendation 2. That the Australian Government amends the law so that all
public universities are required to adopt the International Holocaust
Remembrance Alliance (IHRA) working definition of antisemitism.
The Australian Government acknowledges the range of views presented to the inquiry
and notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government's response, as outlined above, reflects the range of actions
the Government is taking to respond to the issues raised in this inquiry.
Recommendation 3. That Australian universities review and amend their hiring
policies and policies relating to employee conduct to prevent and address
antisemitic behaviour among academic staff.
The Australian Government acknowledges the range of views presented to the inquiry
and notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government encourages universities to consider this recommendation
in consultation with their students, staff, communities and other stakeholders.
Response to the recommendations | 8
Ms Kylea Tink MP Additional Comments
Recommendation 1. Universities should, for the purposes of addressing
complaints of antisemitism relating to students or staff, adopt a definition of
antisemitism that recognises the distinction between antisemitism and criticism
of the Israeli Government and Zionism.
The Australian Government acknowledges the range of views presented to the inquiry
and notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government encourages universities to consider this recommendation
in consultation with their students, staff, communities and other stakeholders.
Recommendation 2. The government should adopt the Australian Human Rights
Commission National Anti-Racism Framework.
The Australian Government acknowledges the range of views presented to the inquiry
and notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government's response, as outlined above, reflects the range of actions
the Government is taking to respond to the issues raised in this inquiry.
Recommendation 3. Universities should address antisemitism as part of broader
strategies to reduce racism in all its forms.
The Australian Government acknowledges the range of views presented to the inquiry
and notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government encourages universities to consider this recommendation
in consultation with their students, staff, communities and other stakeholders.
Recommendation 4. The government should consolidate Australia’s anti-
discrimination legislative framework into a single, uniform Anti-Discrimination Act.
The Australian Government acknowledges the range of views presented to the inquiry
and notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government's response, as outlined above, reflects the range of actions
the Government is taking to respond to the issues raised in this inquiry.
Response to the recommendations | 9
Recommendation 5. Universities should adopt the Rabat Plan of Action on the
prohibition of advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes
incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence six-part threshold test to
appropriately distinguish between hate speech and protected expression in
practice.
The Australian Government acknowledges the range of views presented to the inquiry
and notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government encourages universities to consider this recommendation
in consultation with their students, staff, communities and other stakeholders.
Recommendation 6. The government should introduce legislation to establish a
Human Rights Act, as per the recommendation of the Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Human Rights inquiry into Australia’s Human Rights Framework
The Australian Government acknowledges the range of views presented to the inquiry
and notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government's response, as outlined above, reflects the range of actions
the Government is taking to respond to the issues raised in this inquiry.
Response to the recommendations | 10
Senator Lidia Thorpe Additional Comments
Recommendation 1. Universities in their approach to racism adopt a holistic anti-
racism framework, jointly developed with representatives of all racialised
communities.
The Australian Government acknowledges the range of views presented to the inquiry
and notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government encourages universities to consider this recommendation
in consultation with their students, staff, communities and other stakeholders.
Recommendation 2. For the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights to
undertake a review of the effectiveness of the Racial Discrimination Act 1975, a
proposal that is supported by the Race Discrimination Commissioner.
The Australian Government acknowledges the range of views presented to the inquiry
and notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government's response, as outlined above, reflects the range of actions
the Government is taking to respond to the issues raised in this inquiry.
Recommendation 3. Universities should be guided by the 2020 Jerusalem
Declaration on Antisemitism in their attempts to identify and fight antisemitism
while protecting freedom of expression.
The Australian Government acknowledges the range of views presented to the inquiry
and notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government encourages universities to consider this recommendation
in consultation with their students, staff, communities and other stakeholders.
Recommendation 4. For the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights to
conduct a review of the Australian Government's compliance with international
human rights obligations in relation to the plausible genocide in Palestine,
including adherence to orders from United Nations bodies and the findings and
opinions of the International Court of Justice.
The Australian Government acknowledges the range of views presented to the inquiry
and notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government's response, as outlined above, reflects the range of actions
the Government is taking to respond to the issues raised in this inquiry.
Response to the recommendations | 11
