OFFICIAL: SENSITIVE
Australian Government response to the
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs
Legislation Committee report:
Copyright Legislation Amendment (Fair
Pay for Radio Play) Bill 2023
DECEMBER 2025
OFFICIAL: SENSITIVE
OFFICIAL: SENSITIVE
Introduction
The Copyright Legislation Amendment (Fair Pay for Radio Play) Bill 2023 (the Bill) was
introduced by Senator David Pocock and referred by the Senate to the Legal and
Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee (the Committee) for inquiry and report.
The Bill seeks to repeal subsection 152(8) of the Copyright Act 1968, which caps the amount
of royalties that the Copyright Tribunal of Australia (Copyright Tribunal) can determine is
payable by commercial radio stations for the use of sound recordings to one per cent of gross
earnings of the broadcaster (the 1% cap) and subsection 152(11), which caps the amount of
royalties that the Copyright Tribunal can determine is payable by the Australian Broadcasting
Corporation (ABC) for the use of sound recordings, to an amount not exceeding 0.5 cents per
head of the Australian population (the ABC cap).
The caps only affect rights in sound recordings of music (as administered by the
Phonographic Performance Company of Australia (PPCA)) and not the underlying rights in
the musical works themselves (as administered by the Australasian Performing Right
Association and Australasian Mechanical Copyright Owners Society (APRA AMCOS)). The
caps also do not apply to the use of sound recordings on online streaming services, as such
services are not considered ‘broadcasting services’ under the Broadcasting Services Act 1992.
The Committee released its report on 20 June 2024. The Government welcomes the
Committee’s report.
The Government strongly supports Australian artists and creators, as demonstrated through
Revive, the Government’s National Cultural Policy. Music Australia was established under
Creative Australia with dedicated funding of $69.4m over four years from 2023-24 through
Revive.
Music Australia is undertaking targeted research in consultation with key music industry
stakeholders to inform their strategic investments and address the contemporary needs of the
music industry, including artists incomes and career development and pathways.
However, in addition to impacts on the recording artists and recording industry, the removal
of the radio broadcast licence fee caps would impact a range of other stakeholders, including
regional and remote radio broadcasters and the ABC. These implications also require careful
consideration.
The Government recognises the importance of a strong, fair and balanced copyright system,
and will continue to work with all stakeholders to better understand the potential impacts of
changes to the radio broadcast royalty caps. This should be done in a holistic way in the
context of broader reforms in the copyright, communications and arts portfolios and
Government’s broader media reform agenda.
2
OFFICIAL: SENSITIVE
OFFICIAL: SENSITIVE
Recommendations
Recommendation 1: The committee recommends that the federal government conducts a
cost-benefit analysis examining the impacts of removing the current caps on licence fees for
the broadcast of sound recordings on radio.
Response: Agreed in principle.
The Government strongly supports Australian artists and creators. This is demonstrated
through Revive, the Government’s National Cultural Policy.
The Government agrees that a cost-benefit analysis, as recommended by the Committee,
would assist with understanding the potential impacts on stakeholders of retaining, amending
or removing the current caps in today’s media environment, including impacts on the
recorded music industry and remote/regional radio stations.
The Government notes that there may be several ways to obtain this information, including
reviewing the outcome of recent Copyright Tribunal proceedings on this issue and/or
conducting its own independent economic analysis. The Government will give this further
consideration.
Recommendation 2: The committee recommends that the Senate does not pass the Bill.
Response: Noted.
The Government notes the dissenting reports made by Senator David Pocock, and by Senator
Sarah Hanson-Young on behalf of the Australian Greens recommending that the Senate pass
the Bill.
3
OFFICIAL: SENSITIVE
