Australian Government response to the
Senate Economics References Committee report:
Micro-competition opportunities in e-conveyancing
March 2026

Introduction
The Australian Government thanks the Senate Economic References Committee for its consideration
of micro-competition opportunities in e-conveyancing.
The Government supports progress toward a more competitive, dynamic and resilient Electronic
Conveyancing (eConveyancing) market that benefits consumers, practitioners, industry participants
and the broader economy. The Government recognises that competition in eConveyancing is
constrained by the existing market structure, and challenges to date in delivering a functional model
for interoperability. The Government considers that a more competitive market could support
improved service quality, strengthen system resilience, and put downward pressure on costs and
prices across the supply chain.
Responsibility for regulating eConveyancing primarily rests with the states and territories. There is
substantial work underway across jurisdictions, and significant resources expended to date, to develop
a sustainable and competitive market structure for eConveyancing. The Commonwealth supports
these efforts and recognises that ongoing cooperation between governments is necessary to achieve
the best outcomes for consumers, businesses, and the wider Australian public.
At the same time, the Government acknowledges that significant challenges must be navigated to
arrive at a more competitive market outcome. These include addressing regulatory gaps, resolving
outstanding issues with interoperability models and viable alternatives, and ensuring appropriate
governance and accountability arrangements across the sector. These are complex issues that remain
under active consideration by governments.
The Government provides the following response to the Committee’s recommendations.
Introduction | 1
Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Australian Registrars’ National Electronic Conveyancing
Council (ARNECC) invite the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) to have a
permanent presence on the Council and attend its meetings regularly.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
While it is a matter for ARNECC to invite participation from individuals and agencies as it sees fit,
the Government does not consider that making the ACCC a permanent member would materially
improve ARNECC’s regulatory effectiveness or enhance the development of eConveyancing policy.
The ACCC has no formal role in relation to Conveyancing beyond its normal functions
administering the Competition and Consumer Act 2010 (CCA). The ACCC, alongside Council of
Financial Regulators (CFR) member agencies, engages with ARNECC through regular cross-agency
meetings, as well as through ad-hoc senior engagement. Through these engagement
mechanisms, the ACCC can continue to provide advice to promote effective competition and
regulation in eConveyancing, as appropriate, and consider potential breaches of the CCA.
Permanent ACCC membership within ARNECC would likely increase resourcing requirements for
the ACCC without materially improving its ability to provide advice or undertake its statutory
functions.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that following the release of the Australian Registrars’ National
Electronic Conveyancing Council reviews:
• the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission investigate the e-conveyancing
market and report on its findings to both the Treasurer and the Assistant Minister for
Competition, Charities and Treasury within six months as to whether further action is
required in the e-conveyancing sector; and
• the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission publish the report of its findings,
to be tabled in the Senate within fifteen sitting days.
Australian Government response
The Government does not support this recommendation.
The Government recognises that section 95H of the CCA allows the relevant Minister to direct the
ACCC to hold an inquiry into a specified matter or specified matters.
The Government notes that substantial work is already underway to address competition and
interoperability issues in eConveyancing. ARNECC has recently finalised and published reports for
two of its three strategic reviews on interoperability. ARNECC is also working to finalise its third
review, which focuses on the eConveyancing regulatory framework. Relevant Commonwealth
regulators are actively contributing to this work. A NSW Select Committee inquiry into
competition reforms in eConveyancing is currently examining many of the same issues.
Response to recommendations | 2
Collectively, these and other related processes have identified and explored the key competition
and market structure concerns in the sector, and have provided a detailed and well-developed
evidence base of where the major frictions arise.
Considering the extensive work underway and already completed, the Government does not
consider that directing the ACCC to undertake an inquiry at this time would materially advance
understanding of the issues or deliver additional practical benefits. It is not clear that a further
inquiry would provide new insights beyond those already being examined through existing
regulatory, policy and parliamentary processes.
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that:
• the Australian Registrar’s National Electronic Conveyancing Council make the Financial
Requirements Review and the Cost Benefit Analysis publicly available; and
• if public release is not possible, then a summary of key findings and recommendations be
provided to the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, the Treasurer, the
Assistant Minister for Competition, Charities and Treasury and tabled in the Senate fifteen
sitting days from receipt.
Australian Government response
The Government supports this recommendation.
The Government notes ARNECC published these reports on 23 December 2025.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that, in the event that interoperability is not pursued after reviews
by the Australian Registrars’ National Electronic Conveyancing Council are completed, the
Australian Government should review what other initiatives might be taken to ensure the
reliability and resilience of the e-conveyancing sector.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government will continue to work with state and territory governments through ARNECC and
relevant ministerial forums to support the development of regulatory and market models that
address key risks and maximise net public benefits. This includes engaging with ARNECC as it
progresses its current review and follow on actions, and considering how Commonwealth
expertise, particularly in competition law and policy, payments regulation, financial services, and
consumer protection can constructively complement state and territory regulatory
responsibilities.
The findings of ARNECC’s regulatory governance review, due later this year, will provide a clearer
picture of the coverage and gaps in eConveyancing regulation. The Government remains open to
considering appropriate regulatory and non-regulatory roles for the Commonwealth, where such
Response to recommendations| 3
involvement would be in the public interest and enhance system resilience, support effective
competition, and address issues that states and territories cannot practically resolve alone.
ARNECC has an existing framework for overseeing the performance levels of Electronic Lodgment
Network Operators (ELNO) under its Model Operating Requirements (MOR), which set minimum
standards of service availability and reliability, system performance (including resilience) and
incident management. State and territory registrars determine Operating Requirements for their
respective jurisdiction based on the MOR developed by ARNECC. ARNECC regularly monitors
ELNOs’ performance with these requirements.
The Government supports ARNECC conducting a review of how it can uplift existing data and
reporting practices through its MOR to improve transparency and thereby strengthen reliability
and resilience of ELNO systems.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends, regardless of the finding of the Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission on whether any further action is required, that national competition policy
(NCP) reforms by the Australian Government consider e-conveyancing in a future tranche.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government works collaboratively with states and territories to scope and develop reform
proposals that can progress under the NCP framework. Governments, via the Council on Federal
Financial Relations (CFFR) agree to NCP reforms under a Federation Funding Agreement (FFA)
Schedule.
NCP aims to progress reforms that reflect national priorities and will facilitate effective
competition across Australia’s economy to promote efficiency and productivity growth to
sustainably improve living standards and opportunities for Australians. Reforms must align with
one or more of the objectives outlined in the NCP FFA schedule, which include promoting a more
dynamic business environment and leveraging the economic opportunities of data and digital
technology. The Government will work with state and territory Governments through the NCP
governance framework to consider whether there are eConveyancing reforms suitable to
progress through NCP.
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends that the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority prioritise the
auditing of banking institutions compliance with Prudential Standard Cross-industry Prudential
Standard 230 and to publish a report of its findings in an e-conveyancing context by 30 June 2026.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
Response to recommendations | 4
The Government recognises the importance of operational resilience across the financial system.
The Australian Prudential Regulation Authority’s (APRA) mandate under the Australian Prudential
Regulation Authority Act 1998 and the Banking Act 1959 is to promote the safety and stability of
regulated entities through a risk-based, system-wide prudential framework.
APRA is an independent statutory authority. APRA’s existing statement of expectations issued by
Government also recognises APRA’s regulatory independence. Consistent with its expectations of
APRA’s role, the Government will not seek to influence how APRA undertakes specific compliance
activities within its area of regulatory responsibility.
APRA’s standard requires that regulated entities are responsible for identifying and managing
risks associated with any material service providers supporting their critical operations, including
ensuring appropriate contractual and contingency arrangements are in place. Material service
providers are those on which the entity relies to undertake a critical operation or that expose it to
material operational risk.
APRA will continue to supervise CPS 230 compliance through its established supervision
programme (2025 – 2028) and provide prudential insights to Government where appropriate.
Response to recommendations| 5
