Australian Government response to the
Senate Economics References Committee report:
Residential electrification
MARCH 2026
Introduction
On 14 June 2023, the Senate referred an inquiry into Australia’s residential electrification
efforts to the Senate Economics References Committee (committee).i The terms of
reference were to inquire into Australia’s residential electrification efforts, with particular
reference to:
a) the economic opportunities of household electrification, including but not limited to:
i. long-term reduction of energy price inflation
ii. long-term employment opportunities
iii. the scaling up of domestic capacity
b) the macro-barriers to increasing the uptake of home electrification
c) the total upfront cost and longer-term benefits of household electrification and
alternative models for funding and implementation
d) the marginal cost of abatement for household electrification compared to alternative
sectors and options to decarbonise the economy
e) the optimal timeline for household electrification accounting for the likely timing of
decarbonising electricity
f) the impacts and opportunities of household electrification for domestic energy
security, household energy independence and for balance of international trade
g) the impacts of household electrification on reducing household energy spending and
energy inflation as a component of the consumer price index
h) solutions to the economic barriers to electrification for low-income households
i) the effectiveness of existing Australian Federal, state and local government
initiatives to promote and provide market incentives for household electrification
j) Australia’s current standing against international standards, particularly with respect
to the uptake of rooftop solar, batteries and electric household appliances
k) any other matters.
The committee published details of the inquiry and asked for submissions by 29 December
2023.ii The committee held 3 public hearings from 22 November 2023 to 22 March 2024 at
Parliament House, Canberra. The inquiry report was tabled on 31 March 2025.iii
The Australian Government supports residential electrification through a suite of policy
initiatives and investments so communities can take advantage of cheaper, cleaner energy
to reduce energy bills and reduce emissions. Core recommendations of this inquiry are
already underway, backed up by the Government’s substantial progress towards 82%
renewables in the electricity grid by 2030.
Response
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the Australian Government, in coordination with
state and territory governments, should promote households to uptake consumer
energy resources (CER), including rooftop solar, home batteries, bi-direction
electric vehicle chargers and home energy management systems. In conjunction
with those efforts, households should be promoted to participate with aggregators
which can operate distributed assets in a coordinated fashion in response to grid
and market conditions.
Response
Agreed.
The Australian Government promotes the uptake of consumer energy resources through the
Small-scale Renewable Energy Scheme (SRES). The SRES provides a financial incentive
for households, small businesses and community groups to install eligible small-scale
renewable energy systems such as rooftop solar.
The Australian Government is expanding the SRES to provide incentives to households to
install battery energy storage systems through the Cheaper Home Batteries program. The
program offers a 30% discount on batteries for all households.
The Australian Government is providing a $1 billion equity injection to the Clean Energy
Finance Corporation (CEFC) through the Household Energy Upgrades Fund (HEUF).iv
This provides concessional finance for household energy upgrades, including solar panels
and solar batteries. The total investment to date has been more than $800 million, including
a $417 million commitment from the Australian Government.v It is anticipated the program
will finance upgrades for over 110,000 households.
In 2025, Energy and Climate Change Ministers (ECMC) updated the Trajectory for Low
Energy Buildings and endorsed the Trajectory Implementation Plan 2026-27. The
Trajectory Implementation Plan outlines collaborative work between state, territory, and
commonwealth governments, including promoting efficient electrification as a priority. The
Plan also identifies specific actions planned by some state and territory governments to
support home electrification and the uptake of consumer energy resources.
The Australian Government is working with state and territory governments to unlock the full
potential of CER through the CER Roadmap (the roadmap).vi The roadmap sets out an
overarching vision and plan to unlock CER at scale across Australia. The roadmap will
deliver equity in the transition and a coordinated vision for rooftop solar and batteries, virtual
power plants and other forms of CER.
The roadmap outlines how governments will:
• work to enable CER’s vast potential to lower bills
• improve reliability
• cut network costs by reducing the need for grid-scale investment.
State and territory governments, and industry, are conducting programs involving virtual
power plants (VPP) and implementing the Cheaper Home Batteries Program. For example:
vii
• the South Australian government, in partnership with Tesla, is developing South
Australia’s Virtual Power Plant, a network of potentially 50,000 solar and Tesla
Powerwall home battery systems statewide
• the Western Australian government has released a Statement on the Interoperability
of Distributed Energy Resources, detailing how distributed energy resource
communication and installation will be harmonised in the South West Interconnected
System.
In addition, the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA) and RACE for 2030
released the National Roadmap for Bidirectional EV Charging which directly contributes
to the roadmap.viii It includes a number of recommendations involving industry and
Australian, state and territory governments working together to integrate bidirectional EV
charging into the roadmap.
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that the Australian Government, in coordination with
state and territory governments, should prioritise investment in technologies that
extend and improve the system value of rooftop solar, such as home batteries and
home energy management systems.
Response
Agreed.
As noted in Recommendation 1, the Australian Government is working with state and
territory governments to unlock the full potential of CER through the roadmap. The
Australian Government is working collaboratively with jurisdictions to deliver these reforms.
The Australian Government also notes the other programs included in recommendation 1
such as the National Roadmap for Bidirectional EV Charging and Cheaper Home Batteries
Program.
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the Australian Government, in coordination with
state and territory governments, should prioritise how community batteries can
spread the benefits of rooftop solar to consumers who are unable to install their
own systems, such as renters, apartment dwellers or low-income earners.
Response
Agreed.
Australia’s rapid uptake of rooftop solar is reshaping daytime electricity demand and creating
new opportunities to make better use of abundant renewable generation. The Solar Sharer
Offer (SSO) builds on these opportunities by providing a regulated daily free power period—
up to 24 kWh—for residential customers with smart meters. This incentive rewards
households for shifting their electricity use into periods of high solar output.
By enabling more Australians to benefit from plentiful daytime renewable energy, the SSO
aims to improve affordability, support a fairer distribution of solar benefits, and contribute to
long term system efficiency. It forms part of the government’s broader package of measures
designed to give households more ways to reduce their electricity bills.
The Australian Government currently has two community energy programs that are providing
the benefits of community batteries and solar energy to a range of consumers. These
programs are:ix
• Community Batteries for Household Solar program—the Commonwealth is
investing $200 million to deploy 400 batteries across Australia. This program will put
downward pressure on household electricity costs, contribute towards lowering
emissions, provide a benefit to the electricity network by relieving network
constraints, store solar energy for later use, and support new solar installations.
• Community Solar Banks program—the Commonwealth is funding programs
administered by the States and Territories to support community-scale solar, rooftop
solar and clean energy technology projects. The programs aim to share the benefits
of solar with renters, apartments residents and those that cannot afford solar or are
locked out of installing their own.
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the Australian Government and state and territory
governments consider cost-effective local tuition for apprentices, such as electrical
apprentices.
Response
Agreed.
The Australian Government, in partnership with states and territories, is delivering
$1.5 billion in joint funding for over 500,000 Fee-Free TAFE and vocational education and
training (VET) places across Australia from 2023 to 2026. This includes Fee-Free
Construction, with courses related to electrotechnology available in many jurisdictions.
Eligibility for Fee-Free TAFE for apprentices varies between jurisdictions. For most
apprenticeship arrangements, employers are responsible for the training related costs, either
paid directly by the employer or through a reimbursement to the apprentice.
The Australian Government has also made Free TAFE an enduring feature of the national
VET system. This includes investing an additional $1.6 billion to 2034–35 to support at least
100,000 places annually from 2027, underpinned by the Free TAFE Act 2025.Free TAFE will
be developed and delivered in partnership with states and territories, with eligibility
requirements and courses subject to negotiations.
The Australian Government is investing up to $12.6 billion over 5 years to 2028 under the
National Skills Agreement. The agreement will expand and transform access to the
vocational education and training (VET) sector, support training providers to deliver quality
education and training, and implement reforms to address critical skills needs. This
investment is $3.7 billion above what was available under previous funding arrangements.
It includes up to $11.3 billion in flexible funding to states and territories to support the
delivery of VET and to address agreed national priorities, including supporting the net zero
transformation and delivering housing supply. States and territories can use this funding for
a range of purposes, including VET programs that support employers to engage with VET by
training their workforce and/or employing an apprentice or trainee.
The Australian Government has several financial and non-financial programs in place that
are available to support apprentices and employers training in high-priority occupations,
such as clean energy and housing.
The Key Apprenticeship Program (KAP) commenced on 1 July 2025 and builds on the
success of the New Energy Apprenticeships Program which commenced on 1 January 2023.
The KAP aims to encourage the growth of the housing construction and clean energy
workforce by expanding the pipeline of workers training towards critical occupations in these
sectors.
The KAP contains two streams:
• New Energy Apprenticeship (NEA) stream; and
• Housing Construction Apprenticeship (HCA) stream.
Eligible Australian Apprentices can claim up to $10,000 for a full-time apprenticeship and up
to $5,000 for a part-time apprenticeship over the life of the Australian Apprenticeship
journey.
From 1 January 2026 eligible employers can claim up to $5,000 for a full-time apprenticeship
and up to $2,500 for a part-time apprenticeship in the first year of an apprenticeship.
Response to Senator Pocock Recommendations
Recommendation 1
Australian Government establish clear national targets for household
electrification, including an initial goal of electrifying at least 5 million homes by
2035, aligned with Australia's commitment to reach 82% renewable energy by 2030.
Response
Noted.
The Australian Government is committed to working constructively with states and territories
– a number of which already have household electrification targets in place – to support the
transition of our energy systems, while maintaining reliable and affordable energy for
Australian households.
The Government has a range of programs that provide voluntary incentives for households
who choose to electrify, as set out in response to Recommendation 2, below. The
Government addresses the broader role of electrification in decarbonising the Australian
economy in its Net Zero Plan and sector plans, released in 2025.
Recommendation 2
Australian Government invest in an ambitious program of household electrification
and energy efficiency upgrades consisting of $5 billion investment immediately and
$50 billion over the coming 10 years.
Response
Noted.
The Australian Government has a range of programs that improve choice for household
electrification and energy efficiency upgrades.
The Australian Government is expanding the SRES to provide incentives to households to
install battery energy storage systems through the Cheaper Home Batteries program. The
program offers a 30% discount on batteries for all households.
The Household Energy Upgrades Fund (HEUF) is a $1 billion equity injection to the Clean
Energy Finance Corporation (CEFC). The fund provides concessional finance for household
energy upgrades.x The Australian Government has committed $417 million under the HEUF
to date.xi Co-financiers have contributed up to $428 million bringing total investment to more
than $800 million to date. It is anticipated the program will finance upgrades for over 110,000
households.
The Social Housing Energy Performance Initiative (SHEPI), is providing $1.1 billion
(including $800 million from the Australian Government) to reduce energy costs and
consumption and improve thermal comfort for social housing tenants.xii
The Australian Government is working in partnership with state and territory governments to
deliver SHEPI., Energy performance upgrades being delivered include thermal shell
upgrades, energy efficient appliances and solar systems.xiii The SHEPI is now expected to
reach more than 100,000 social housing properties.
The Nationwide House Energy Rating Scheme (NatHERS) provides energy ratings for
homes. The Scheme is administered by the Australian Government on behalf of state and
territory governments. It is used in over 90% of new homes to demonstrate compliance with
the National Construction Code. The Australian Government has expanded NatHERS to
offer home energy ratings for existing homes, with the rollout commencing in July 2025.xiv
These ratings will:
• Allow Australian households to better understand their home’s energy performance
and help identify the most cost effective upgrades, including electrification.
• Underpin home energy rating disclosure schemes at point of sale or lease (which are
being considered by state and territory governments) and enable other standards
that state and territory governments may adopt, such as minimum rental standards.
In addition, the Australian Government is continuing to work with state and territory
governments to support a nationally consistent approach to disclosure of home energy
ratings through implementation of the Home Energy Ratings Disclosure Framework.
The Framework (version 2) was released by the Energy and Climate Change Ministerial
Council on 6 December 2024.xv Home energy ratings disclosure enables prospective buyers
or renters to make more informed decisions when purchasing or leasing a property and
makes energy efficiency features more visible and valued in the market, helping to drive
retrofit of the existing housing stock over time.
Recommendation 3
That the investment in Recommendation 2 financial incentives, including rebates
and low-interest financing, to reduce upfront costs associated with household
electrification technologies
Response
Noted.
See response to Recommendation 2.
Recommendation 4
Australian Government develops policies to ensure that rental properties, multi-
dwelling structures and low-income households have equal access to household
electrification.
Response
Noted.
See response to Recommendation 2.
Recommendation 5
Expand the SRES to include home battery systems, significantly reducing their
installation cost and promoting widespread adoption
Response
Agreed.
As noted in response to the Inquiry Report’s recommendation 1, the Australian Government
has announced the Cheaper Home Batteries Program. This includes purchasing of SRES
battery certificates to ensure no cost pass through to energy consumers.
This will help Australian homes and small businesses invest in batteries to promote more
widespread adoption.
Recommendation 6
Establish a workforce development program and enhance domestic supply chains
for key electrification technologies
Response
Agreed.
As noted in response to the Inquiry Report’s recommendation 4, the Australian Government
has a number of initiatives in place to develop a workforce for electrification.
The National Renewable Energy Supply Chain Action Plan sets out the Government’s
approach to identifying and reducing risks in Australia’s renewable energy supply chains, to
help meet the 2030 renewables target.
The Australian Government is investing to enhance Australian manufacturing of key
electrification technologies including through the $1 billion Solar Sunshot program to boost
solar PV manufacturing in Australia by supporting innovation and scaling up domestic
production of solar panels and their components, and through the $500 million Battery
Breakthrough Initiative to enhance Australian battery manufacturing capabilities.
The Australian Government continues to develop work that supports increased transparency
of future domestic componentry needs for critical renewable energy technologies.
Additionally, the Commonwealth also has strategies in place to support the VET workforce
specifically:
• Under the National Skills Agreement, the Australian Government is investing up to
$100 million for initiatives to support the VET workforce, including responses to the
VET Workforce Blueprint agreed by all Skills Ministers in 2024. This includes $70
million for state and territory initiatives, with matched funding from states and
territories, and $30 million for national action.
• To support the release of the Blueprint, a suite of Commonwealth-led national actions
are being progressed to support a greater understanding of the VET workforce, and
to inform further responses to grow and support this workforce. This includes
occupational mapping of the VET workforce, a VET workforce data strategy, an
ongoing research program for VET workforce issues, and mapping and analysing
compliance and administrative burden for the VET workforce. The Commonwealth is
working closely with Jobs and Skills Australia and states and territories on these
actions.
• The Australian Government is also taking further action to progress shared national
priorities through targeting initiatives to support the First Nations VET workforce, and
to boost the VET workforce in critical industries including construction and electrical,
noting the importance these sectors play in driving Australia’s productivity.
Australian Government funding to build and support the VET workforce is also being
provided, with $12 million for Jobs and Skills Councils industry-led initiatives that respond to
VET workforce challenges faced by their industries. In addition, $30 million is being provided
to turbocharge the teacher, trainer and assessor workforce for clean energy, manufacturing
and construction. The latter measure will support an increase to the pipeline of teachers,
trainers and assessors to deliver qualifications for these critical industries. The Australian
Government is investing up to $325 million over five years under the NSA, with matched
funding from states and territories, to establish nationally networked TAFE Centres of
Excellence. These Centres will help provide nationally consistent, world-class teaching and
learning, targeting critical and emerging industries, including the transformation to a net zero
economy.
• To date, 4 TAFE Centres of Excellence have been established in the renewable
energy sector, with a focus on electricians and electrotechnology skills, including the:
• NSW Hunter Net Zero Manufacturing Centre of Excellence which is developing an
associate degree in Electrotechnology and Renewable Technologies (higher
apprenticeship).
• Queensland TAFE Centre of Excellence Clean Energy Batteries which is consulting
on the development of higher-level apprenticeship and/or degree level apprenticeship
pathways, including through the Certificate III Electrotechnology Electrician and the
Bachelor of Engineering/Electrical Science.
• Tasmanian Clean Energy Centre of Excellence which is developing General and
Electrical (technical) Engineering Paraprofessional pilots.
• ACT Electric Vehicle TAFE Centre of Excellence which is developing a dual-qualified
automotive trade apprentices’ program, including light and heavy EV technician and
automotive electrician.
Recommendation 7
Commence a process to reform the design of the National Energy Market in
accordance with my additional comments to the recent report from the Select
Committee on Energy Planning and Regulation in Australia.
Response
Noted.
The Australian Government is considering its response on the December 2024 Senate
Select Committee on Energy Planning and Regulation in Australia’s report and will address
this recommendation in that response.
In November 2024, the Australian Government announced a review of the National
Electricity Market (NEM) wholesale market settings by an independent expert panel. The
panel was supported by the Commonwealth Department of Climate Change, Energy, the
Environment and Water, state and territory governments and market bodies
The NEM Review Final Report and supporting Implementation Roadmap were presented to
Energy Ministers on 16 December 2025 and published. Energy Ministers, except for
Queensland, agreed in-principle to the NEM Review’s core recommendations. These include
establishing an Electricity Services Entry Mechanism, a Market Making Obligation, and
measures to improve the visibility of Price Responsive Resources. The Australian
Government is working closely with states and territories, industry and market bodies to
progress detailed design of the core recommendations of the review, to allow further
consideration of the proposed reforms by the Energy and Climate Change Ministers
throughout 2026.
i Senate Economic References Committee, Residential electrification, Report, 31 March 2025, accessed
7 April 2025.
ii Senate Economic References Committee, Residential electrification, Report, 31 March 2025, accessed
7 April 2025, p. 2.
iii Senate Economic References Committee, Residential electrification, Report, 31 March 2025, accessed
9 April 2025.
iv CEFC, Household Energy Upgrades Fund - Clean Energy Finance Corporation, Website, accessed 19
May.
v CEFC, Opening doors for sustainable Australian homes, Report, 11 February 2025, accessed 22 May
2025, p. 2.
vi DCCEEW, Energy Ministers agree to the National Consumer Energy Resources (CER) Roadmap,
Website, 19 July 2024, accessed 19 May 2025.
vii DCCEEW, South Australia's Virtual Power Plant, Website, accessed 19 May 2025; and WA
Government, Statement on Interoperability of Distributed Energy Resources, Announcement, 3 June 2025,
accessed 6 June 2025 .
viii ARENA, National Roadmap for Bidirectional EV Charging in Australia, Website, 25 February 2025,
accessed 19 May 2025.
ix DCCEEW, Community Batteries for Household Solar program, Website, accessed 19 May 2025; and
DCCEEW, Community solar banks, Website, accessed 19 May 2025.
x CEFC, Household Energy Upgrades Fund - Clean Energy Finance Corporation, Website, accessed 19
May.
xi CEFC, Opening doors for sustainable Australian homes, Report, 11 February 2025, accessed 22 May
2025, p. 2.
xii DCCEEW, Social housing energy performance - DCCEEW, Website, accessed 20 May.
xiv NATHERS, Existing homes | Nationwide House Energy Rating Scheme (NatHERS), Website, accessed
19 May 2025.
xv DCCEEW, Home Energy Ratings Disclosure Framework – Version 2 | energy.gov.au, Website, accessed
19 May.
