SENATOR THE HON MURRAY WATT
MINISTER FOR THE ENVIRONMENT AND WATER
MS26-900083
Senator the Hon Sue Lines
President of the Senate
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600
senator.lines@aph.gov.au
Dear President
SENATE ORDER 455 - Australian Government response to report of the Environment
and Communications References Committee on Algal blooms in South Australia
Please find attached response to Senate Order 455 regarding the Australian Government
response to the Senate inquiry into Algal blooms in South Australia.
Yours sincerely
MURRAY WATT 29 / 30 / 2026
Enc Australian Government response to the Environment and Communications References
Committee ‘Algal blooms in South Australia’
Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 Telephone (02) 6277 7920
OFFICIAL
Australian Government response to the
Senate Environment and Communications References Committee report:
Algal blooms in South Australia
MARCH 2026
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Introduction
On 23 July 2025, the Senate referred an inquiry into ‘Algal blooms in South Australia’ to the
Environment and Communications References Committee for inquiry and report.
On 11 November 2025, the committee released its report and made 14 recommendations.
The Australian Government welcomes the report, the 14 Committee recommendations, and
the additional minority recommendations, that will improve our ability to understand, prepare,
and respond to similar events in the future.
The Australian Government acknowledges the significant impacts the harmful algal bloom
has caused across the marine environment, businesses, and local communities in South
Australia over the last year. The Australian Government notes that at the point of tabling the
response to the inquiry the algal bloom in South Australia is still active, and that recovery will
take time.
The harmful algal bloom is an unprecedented event that has required a flexible and
innovative policy response. The Australian Government has worked hand in hand with the
South Australian Government to provide financial and on ground support to affected South
Australian businesses and communities, while investing in the resilience of the marine
environment.
The Australian Government has contributed $68.7 million to the response effort. With South
Australia’s contributions, over $165 million is being invested, including $102.5 million for the
Algal Bloom Summer Plan. The Australian Government has also responded to this event
through direct investment in tools to improve our ability to forecast and monitor ocean
conditions, actions to protect marine species, and by establishing a new industry support
mechanism through the Regional Investment Corporation.
The National Climate Risk Assessment identifies that marine heatwaves will increase in
frequency and duration in the future, with a range of consequences to the marine
environment, including potentially, future harmful algal blooms. Work to understand the algal
bloom and prepare for future events nationally is important. There will be important learnings
from this event, including how we best prepare, collaborate and respond to future events.
This work, along with the National Adaptation Plan, is critical in supporting our preparedness
for climate change induced threats to our ocean.
2
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends the Australian Government show leadership by developing a
fit for purpose framework for research, monitoring and responses to climate induced, slow-
onset and significant ecological events such as harmful algal blooms.
Response
Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The harmful algal bloom is an unprecedented event that has required a flexible and
innovative policy response. The Australian Government has worked hand in hand with the
South Australian Government to provide financial and on ground support to affected South
Australian businesses and communities, while investing in the resilience of the marine
environment.
The Australian Government supports national approaches to ocean management across
jurisdictions, including for the environment, through meetings of Environment Ministers’, and
on fisheries, marine park and threatened species management. The framework deployed to
respond to the algal bloom has activated many Australian Government departments and
agencies, noting their responsibilities and relevant programs. This has included the
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet; Department of Climate Change, Energy, the
Environment and Water; Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry; the Department
of Education (on the National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy); the Bureau of
Meteorology, CSIRO and the National Emergency Management Agency and Australia’s
Chief Scientist.
This framework supported the Australian Government in responding to formal requests for
funding support from the South Australian Government quickly.
The Australian Government has contributed $68.7 million to the response effort. With South
Australia’s contributions, over $165 million is being invested, including the $102.5 million
Algal Bloom Summer Plan is focused on three core objectives: ensuring South Australians
maintain their way of life; backing coastal businesses and communities; and advancing
research and protecting the environment.
Australia’s ocean economy is valued at over $229 billion (AIMS Marine Index 2025) and is
underpinned by a healthy and resilient ocean environment. As the ocean faces immediate
and long-term impacts from increased global ocean temperatures, improved marine
preparedness planning across all jurisdictions will be critical to protecting the marine
environment and the industries and communities that rely on it.
At the Environment Ministers’ Meeting held on 27 March 2026, Ministers discussed the
significant impact of the Harmful Algal Bloom event and the strength of the South Australian
and Australian Government’s response to the event. Ministers agreed to convene an
intergovernmental workshop across the Australian, state and local governments to share the
lessons learned to inform federal, state and territory preparedness efforts. The Australian
Government has also commissioned a National Environmental Science Program project that
will consider strategies and policies across all levels of government, and create tools to help
us prepare for future harmful algal blooms, including better early warning, forecasting and
mitigation of risks. The interjurisdictional workshop and the NESP Project will inform future
preparedness efforts.
3
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Australia’s Strategy for Nature 2024-2030 and Threatened Species Action Plan 2022-2032
Australia’s Strategy for Nature 2024-2030 sets targets including for minimising the impact of
climate change on biodiversity. To guide collective national action to achieve all jurisdictions’
ambitious biodiversity targets, Ministers agreed the Implementation Plan for Australia’s
Strategy for Nature 2024-2030 at the Environment Ministers’ Meeting held on 27 March
2026.
The Australian Government’s Threatened Species Action Plan 2022-2032 is a framework
that incorporates research, actions and monitoring to recover Australian threatened species.
It includes targets on climate change and planning for emergencies, and is supported by
investments from the Saving Native Species Program, Natural Heritage Trust and National
Environmental Science Program.
These national frameworks provide fit for purpose approaches to research, monitoring and
management of biodiversity in the changing climate.
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends the Australian Government consider reviewing and
expanding arrangements for a new definition for declaring how climate induced, slow-
onset and significant ecological events could be incorporated into a broader national
framework.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends the Australian Government defines the roles of the
Commonwealth, states and territories and local governments throughout the management
and response of climate induced, slow-onset and significant ecological events such as
harmful algal blooms
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian, South Australian and local governments have contributed to the response
efforts.
In Australia, state and territory governments have primary responsibility for protecting life,
property and the environment within their borders, including within their state waters.
In November 2023, Environment Ministers from all states and territories agreed to work
together to better protect critical areas of the environment prior to and during natural
disasters. Since then, jurisdictions have shared information about how they have included
biodiversity assets in emergency management arrangements.
The Australian Government’s Threatened Species Action Plan 2022-2032 includes an
objective to prevent new extinctions and specific targets for improving emergency response
management and planning for important biodiversity assets across jurisdictions.
4
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
In support of biodiversity emergency preparedness at regional levels, the Australian
Government provided $13 million to Natural Resource Management Regional Delivery
Partners (NRM RDPs) over 2023-2024 across Australia to deliver biodiversity and
agricultural natural capital emergency preparedness and response plans. The NRM RDPs
play a pivotal role in their communities for guidance and action before, during and after
events such as cyclones, severe storms, bushfires, floods and heatwaves.
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the Australian Government consider sustained funding
for long-term oceanographic and algal bloom-specific research and monitoring programs
at the national level, including through the utilisation of the Office for Algal Bloom
Research in South Australia.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government has invested $68.7 million in the algal bloom response efforts,
and the $165 million combined funding support with South Australia is delivering
oceanographic and algal bloom research and monitoring, and funding to establish the Office
for Algal Bloom Research in South Australia. This includes $17.3 million into research and
monitoring actions under the Summer Plan, including actions to:
 improve real-time ecosystem monitoring, offshore water analysis and algal bloom
mitigation trials, along with state-of-the-art AI-powered portable live detection
technology to improve understanding of phytoplankton communities over time.
 support real-time oceanographic water quality monitoring and forecasting through a
collaboration with CSIRO, including the acquisition of state-of-the-art monitoring buoy
to support early detection of algal blooms.
 support the establishment of a National Office for Algal Bloom Research in South
Australia. This office will serve as a central hub for national integration of algal bloom
science and undertake vital long-term research into the formation, spread and impact
of algal bloom events.
National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy
The Australian Government funds world-class research infrastructure through the National
Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy (NCRIS). Funding under NCRIS helps
support the Integrated Marine Observing System (IMOS) to operate a wide range of
observing equipment throughout Australia's ocean estate. IMOS has operated since 2006
and is designed to be a fully integrated, national system, observing at ocean-basin and
regional scales. IMOS’ portfolio is operated across different institutions to deploy equipment,
undertake systematic and sustained observation of Australia’s marine environment, and
deliver trusted data streams for use by Australian researchers. IMOS makes all its data
openly and freely accessible to researchers, including the marine and climate science
community, international collaborators and other stakeholders.
5
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
IMOS’ Australian Plankton Survey measures plankton communities around Australia using
Continuous Plankton Recorders (CPRs). The long-term datasets of Australian plankton
sampled and processed by the Australian Plankton Survey provide researchers and
policymakers with environmental and climatic indicators, harmful algal bloom detection,
eutrophication, and pollution information at both local and national scales.
Ocean monitoring and research
Australia is a world leader in marine research, with many dedicated ocean research and
monitoring programs. The ongoing work of the Bureau of Meteorology and IMOS provide
real-time data on temperature, salinity, ocean currents, turbidity, and the presence of
phytoplankton in southern Australian waters working with the South Australian Research
Development Institute.
Understanding how the ocean and ecosystems are changing through long-term and
comprehensive monitoring and modelling is important to inform our knowledge of the ocean
and how it is being affected by changing ocean temperatures. Work to help inform the
prioritisation of scientific efforts and resource allocation, includes the next decadal National
Marine Science Strategy, launched on 26 March 2026, that was led by the National Marine
Science Committee.
Aquawatch
The Australian Government has provided $2 million of additional funding to CSIRO’s
Aquawatch program in response to the harmful algal bloom. AquaWatch combines satellite
and ocean-based observing technologies to provide estimates of marine and freshwater
water quality. The funding enhanced Australia’s national capability in near-real time water
quality and sea surface temperature monitoring, forecasting and environmental intelligence,
strengthening long-term monitoring and forecasting of harmful algal blooms. Work programs
under this package include:
 Delivering near real time, high‑resolution sea surface temperature mapping across
Australia’s continental coastal waters.
 Establishing consistent, reliable, and spatially comprehensive water quality
information from the Murray River through to South Australia’s estuarine and coastal
environments and generating satellite-derived coastal water quality maps.
 Implementing deep learning forecasting models that predict coastal water quality
conditions using satellite Earth observation data for selected Australian regions.
 Developing comprehensive bio-optical and genetic reference database for harmful
algal bloom species using samples from South Australia and cultures from the
national algae collection.
Marine heatwave forecasts
The Australian Government has delivered a new marine heatwave forecast that is available
to the public via the Bureau of Meteorology’s website. The forecasts provide advance
warning of the likelihood, location and severity of marine heatwaves up to four months
ahead. The tool will help governments, industry, researchers and the public understand
forecast ocean temperatures and weather patterns, and enable informed decision making.
6
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
National Environmental Science Program
The Australian Government is working to understand the impact of the algal bloom on
marine species and ecosystems, with over $455,000 of emerging priority funding from the
National Environmental Science Program (NESP) Marine and Coastal Hub. Projects will:
 Deliver a comprehensive assessment of harmful algal bloom impacts on seafloor
ecosystems using habitat imagery, fish assemblage surveys and environmental data.
 Develop a tool to assess harmful algal bloom impacts on food web health on
underwater rocky reefs across South Australia, track ecosystem recovery, and
identify areas vulnerable to future events.
 Undertake a rapid on-the-ground investigation into the toxicology of the Karenia
species bloom currently in South Australian waters.
 Develop strategies and policies across all levels of government, and create tools to
help us prepare for future harmful algal blooms, including better early warning,
forecasting and mitigation of risks.
These projects are underway with fieldwork and analysis expected over the coming months.
The results and findings from these projects are expected by the end of the 2026.
Proposed Priority Assessment List and Threatened Species Scientific Committee
The South Australian Government, scientists and Australian Government are working hard
to understand the impact of the algal bloom on marine species. After corresponding with the
Chair of the Threatened Species Scientific Committee (TSSC), the Minister for the
Environment and Water agreed to prioritise species and ecological communities impacted by
the harmful algal bloom event for consideration for listing as threatened under the
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999.
The theme for the 2026 public nomination period for potential threatened species and
ecological communities is: 'Nominations that support the protection and recovery of species
and ecological communities at risk from the impacts of the harmful algal bloom off the coast
of South Australia'. Public nominations (for species, ecological communities and threatening
processes) opened in late 2025 and close on the 31 March 2026. The TSSC will consider
eligible nominations and provide advice to the Minister on those that should be prioritised for
full assessment.
In February 2026, the Minister for the Environment and Water appointed two new members
to the TSSC. Both members are marine science experts who will further support the TSSC’s
future consideration of species and ecosystems at risk due to the impacts of the algal bloom.
Giant Australian cuttlefish
The Australian Government has committed $250,000 through the Savings Native Species
program towards an innovative air bubble curtain to reduce the risk of the algal bloom
impacting the giant Australian cuttlefish in the South Australian Upper Spencer Gulf. The
bloom did not reach the Upper Spencer Gulf giant Australian cuttlefish breeding site in 2025
and the bubble curtain was not activated. The 2025 hatching season has finished, and
monitoring has shown successful breeding. The Australian Government will continue to work
with the South Australian Government to protect this species ahead of the 2026 breeding
season.
7
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends that the Australian Government consider options for
substantial funding to be directed to projects that deliver large-scale, long-term marine
ecosystem restoration and resilience including meaningful reef restoration along the South
Australian coastline.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government and South Australian Government are investing $20.6 million in
environmental protection and restoration activities under the Algal Bloom Summer Plan,
including actions to:
 support seagrass and blue carbon restoration projects.
 deliver large-scale native oyster reef restoration in the Yorke Peninsula.
 deliver several smaller scale community-led reef restoration projects.
 pursue investigation and trialling of various algal bloom mitigation and real-time
detection techniques.
This work builds on previous native oyster reef restoration activities supported by the
Australian Government’s $20 million Reef Builder program that included three projects in
South Australia waters.
The Australian Government notes that as pressures on our coasts and ocean increase, there
is a need to accelerate ecosystem restoration and adaptation of coastal and ocean
ecosystems. Improving our understanding of the impacts of climate change, the resilience
capacity of ecosystems and species, and effectively monitoring and managing these
changes will be critical to achieving long-term marine ecosystem restoration and resilience.
Australia’s Strategy for Nature 2024-2030 sets targets including for minimising the impact of
climate change on biodiversity. To guide collective national action to achieve all jurisdictions’
ambitious biodiversity targets, Ministers agreed the Implementation Plan for Australia’s
Strategy for Nature 2024-2030 at the Environment Ministers’ Meeting held on 27 March
2026.
IMOS’ National Reef Monitoring Network
Supported by the NCRIS program, IMOS’ National Reef Monitoring Network brings together
shallow reef surveys conducted around Australia (and globally) into a centralised database.
The data provided by the National Reef Monitoring Network contributes to establishing and
supporting national marine baselines, state of the environment reporting and assisting with
the management of Commonwealth and State marine reserves. The data is also heavily
used by researchers around the world. The National Reef Monitoring Network belongs to
IMOS’ Autonomous Underwater Vehicles Facility, which finished in June 2023, with the data
remaining available through the Australian Ocean Data Network (AODN) Portal.
Saving Native Species program
8
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
The Australian Government is funding large scale projects that deliver meaningful
restoration, benefitting many native species. For example, more than 95% of giant kelp
forests have disappeared from Australia’s south-eastern coastlines in recent decades. The
Australian Government’s Saving Native Species program is funding the University of
Tasmania’s Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies project to improve ecological
conditions for the Giant Kelp Forests of Tasmania. Over five hectares of rocky reef was
replanted in 2024 and 2025, including propagation of over one million juvenile giant kelps,
removal of 10,000 invasive sea urchins and translocation of 50,000 undersized lobsters from
deep, cold southern waters to the restoration sites.
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends that the Australian Government considers investing funds
towards the Southern Ocean Discovery Centre for the establishment of a world-class
marine education, research, and tourism hub in South Australia.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
Investment in visitor infrastructure is a priority of THRIVE 2030, the national strategy for the
long-term sustainable growth of the visitor economy. Nature-based tourism, including coastal
and marine tourism, is an important driver of visitation and therefore Australia’s
attractiveness as a destination. By integrating educational opportunities into tourism
offerings, visitors can gain a deeper appreciation of Australia’s unique marine ecosystems
and the importance of their preservation, reinforcing Australia’s reputation as a world-class
destination. The Government will consider opportunities to support marine education
research and tourism in line with the THRIVE strategy and existing programs.
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends that the Australian Government and South Australian
Government evaluate the current investment towards community resilience programs and
mental health support services and explore continued or further investment as required for
communities impacted by the toxic algal bloom.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
This is primarily a matter for the South Australian Government.
Through the Health, Disability and Ageing portfolio, the Australian Government is investing
an estimated $8 billion in 2025-26 in mental health and suicide prevention. This investment
will deliver critical mental health services and expand the range and reach of free mental
health support available. This builds on consecutive investments to grow the mental health
workforce, address urgent gaps in services and improve digital mental health.
A range of Commonwealth-funded mental health services are available to all Australians
with mental health needs. These services afford people with a range of choice and are
9
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
adapted to specific challenges. This includes the Australian Government’s Medicare Mental
Health Check In Service which launched on 1 January 2026. It is a new digital mental health
service providing early support for those experiencing, or at risk of experiencing, mild mental
health challenges, or transient distress. It is free to access and available without a referral or
diagnosis.
The Government funds Primary Health Networks, including the Adelaide and Country
Primary Health Networks, to plan and commission regionally appropriate mental health and
suicide prevention services at low or no cost where appropriate. This includes low to
moderate intensity face-to-face and digital services, and psychological therapies for rural
and remote, under-serviced and/or hard to reach populations. This is in addition to the
mainstream mental health services commissioned by Primary Health Networks, including
Medicare Mental Health Centres.
Recommendation 8
The committee recommends that the South Australian Government provides timely, clear
and scientifically informed public health advice.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
This recommendation is a matter for the South Australian Government.
Recommendation 9
The committee notes the current investment to supporting coastal communities and
recommends that the Australian Government consider allocation of joint funding for
community financial support, which could be delivered through local governments as
untied grants.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
While local government is the exclusive Constitutional purview of the states and territories
which retain responsibility for the appropriate funding of councils, the Australian Government
recognises the important work of local government.
Submissions to the 2024 House of Representatives Inquiry into Local Government
Sustainability suggest that many councils, particularly smaller councils such as those likely
to be affected by algal bloom events, have limited capacity to adopt additional service
delivery beyond their core obligations. Where such capacity does exist, transferring
administrative responsibilities from the Commonwealth, states and territories to local
government would absorb council resources which could be otherwise directed to enhancing
core service obligations.
10
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 10
The committee recommends that the Australian Government consider how it can support
work with the South Australian Government on long-term resilience and recovery
programs for marine-related industries and sectors affected by the harmful algal bloom
including fishing and tourism, in concert with industry. This could include exploring:
 a targeted income support program, akin to Job Keeper, for impacted businesses.
 a voluntary lease or buyback scheme for fishing licences, to provide individuals
and businesses the opportunity to remain in or exit the industry; and
 a tourism recovery fund to support public information campaigns and promotional
efforts to rebuild SA’s tourism reputation, drive visitation, and support nature-
based and marine businesses as they recover.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government has been working in partnership with the South Australian
Government to support marine-related industries and sectors affected by the harmful algal
bloom. The Algal Bloom Summer Plan is investing over $27 million to back businesses and
communities, including $6.1 million towards coastal infrastructure and events, and
$21.5 million for business support grants and industry resilience.
Targeted income support program
The JobKeeper Payment was designed in response to a specific economic shock and is not
an appropriate framework for responding to the South Australian algal bloom. The
Independent Evaluation of the JobKeeper Payment found that a JobKeeper-type wage
subsidy should be reserved for a macroeconomic crisis and concluded that it is not
appropriate for industry- or region-specific shocks or downturns in Australia. Some of the key
benefits of JobKeeper, including economy-wide stabilisation and reducing macroeconomic
uncertainty, are not relevant in these circumstances.
Voluntary lease or buyback scheme
The Australian Government notes the South Australian Government is conducting a study to
examine the long-term sustainability of the Marine Scalefish Fishery, including the possibility
of a voluntary licence buyback program. A decision to implement a buyback program for
South Australian fisheries is a matter for the South Australian Government.
Tourism recovery
The Australian Government continues to support state and territory governments, including
South Australia, by investing in the recovery and resilience of the tourism and supporting the
South Australian algal bloom response.
Actions being delivered in South Australia as part of the algal bloom response include public
information campaigns and promotional efforts to strengthen South Australia’s tourism
reputation and encourage visitation to impacted regions. A $20.5 million component of the
Summer Plan is supporting coastal tourism businesses through dining and travel vouchers
and a coastal tourism marketing campaign to help drive visitation.
11
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 11
The committee recommends the Australian Government finalises and brings forward the
legislative instruments (or amendments, if required) necessary to ensure eligibility for wild
catch fisheries and affected marine businesses under the Regional Investment
Corporation Fund. These need to be tabled for consideration without further delay.
Response
The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Australian Government will make loans available through the Regional Investment
Corporation (RIC) for wild-catch fishing or aquaculture businesses affected by the algal
bloom in South Australia as soon as possible.
On 11 December 2025, the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry,
the Hon Julie Collins MP, announced the provision of a new stream of RIC loans to assist
with slow-onset significant ecological events: the Marine Harmful Algal Bloom and Marine
Heatwave Loan (now known as the Marine Recovery Loan). This loan will help South
Australian wild-catch fishing or aquaculture businesses affected by the recent algal bloom.
These loans will complement the support also available to wild-catch fishing and aquaculture
businesses through the jointly funded Algal Bloom Summer Plan.
The Australian Government recognises the urgency of the loans being made available to
affected businesses as soon as possible. The loan program is expected to launch in the first
half of 2026.
The RIC has established a registration page for businesses interested in applying for the
Marine Recovery Loan (https://www.ric.gov.au/new-loans).
Recommendation 12
The committee recommends the Australian Government, through the Fisheries Research
and Development Corporation, support the South Australian Government in conducting
research and monitoring of fish stocks during and following fishing restrictions, and
undertake a comprehensive impact analysis of fishing in the Gulf St Vincent. This analysis
should assess the ecological, social, and economic implications to inform appropriate
financial support for affected communities and guide the recovery of local ecosystems and
fish stocks.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Fisheries Research and Development Corporation (FRDC) has met with the South
Australian Government regarding research needs associated with the algal bloom. This has
included discussing the incorporation of rapid stock assessment techniques and alternative
stock assessment approaches through FRDC project 2024-078: ‘An Australian Stock
Assessment "Community of Practice": building a collaborative community of stock
assessment practitioners to better support sustainable fisheries management and
consideration of the development of a national stock assessment subprogram by FRDC to
12
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
scope innovations in assessment methodologies. FRDC is in frequent contact with the South
Australian Government regarding research priorities.
Recommendation 13
The committee recommends that the Australian Government consider establishing a
dedicated Local Government Resilience Fund to provide ongoing and flexible financial
assistance to support local councils in responding to climate induced and slow-onset and
significant ecological events.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
Local government is the exclusive Constitutional purview of the states and territories which
retain responsibility for the appropriate funding of councils.
The Australian Government has referred the matter of local government funding and fiscal
sustainability to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Regional
Development, Infrastructure and Transport for inquiry. The inquiry will examine the evolving
obligations of local governments as well as the broader system of funding across all levels of
government that supports them. This is important work, and the Australian Government will
consider any changes to its policies supporting local government in the context of the
inquiry’s eventual findings and recommendations.
Meanwhile, the Australian Government continues to support local governments to deliver for
their communities. In 2025-26 the Government will provide $3.4 billion to local governments
through the Financial Assistance (FA) Grant, including $1.7 billion brought forward and paid
in June 2025. Individual council allocations of FA Grant funding are determined by the states
and territories in accordance with the Local Government (Financial Assistance) Act 1995
(the Act). States and territories have broad discretion under the Act to allocate funding based
on fiscal need which can include consideration of costs borne by councils in meeting
ecological factors.
Recommendation 14
The committee recommends that the Australian Government consider First Nation
leadership and cultural knowledge in all aspects of recovery and management, including:
 integrating first nation scientific knowledge into marine monitoring and restoration
programs.
 providing dedicated funding for recovery and business support for impacted First
Nation enterprises.
 ensuring that First Nation expertise in land and sea management is sought where
these issues affect cultural knowledge and practice; and
 expanding and resourcing Indigenous ranger and sea country programs in affected
coastal regions, with roles for First Nation representatives in the new Office for
Algal Bloom Research.
Response
13
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government notes the significant impacts of the algal bloom on First Nations
fisheries, agribusiness, tourism and the distinctive cultural connections to waters across
South Australia. First Nation scientific knowledge, expertise and leadership in land and sea
management are a critical part of restoration, recovery and monitoring efforts to improve
response and preparedness for future marine events.
The Australian Government notes that Indigenous Protected Area (IPA) rangers are
participating in the coordinated algal bloom response in South Australia. Rangers from the
Point Pearce Aboriginal Corporation have combined their local knowledge of Country and
expertise to conduct daily patrols, record findings, and coordinate clean-ups on prioritised
beaches along the Yorke Peninsula.
Indigenous Rangers Program
The Australian Government administers the Indigenous Ranger Program (IRP), assisting
First Nations people to manage Country in accordance with Traditional Owners’ objectives.
The IRP delivers a broad range of benefits, including environmental, cultural, social and
economic development outcomes. The Government has committed to double the number of
Indigenous rangers to 3,800 by 2030 and work towards gender equality in ranger positions
by expanding and diversifying the IRP.
Indigenous Protected Area (IPA) Program
The Australian Government has committed $231.5 million over five years from 1 July 2023 to
30 June 2028 to continue, improve, and expand the IPA Program.
The IPA Program supports First Nations groups to manage land and Sea Country through
voluntary agreements with the Australian Government. Established in 1997, the program has
grown to 95 dedicated projects nationally, representing more than 54 percent of Australia’s
National Reserve System on land and over six million hectares of Sea Country. IPAs are
managed for biodiversity conservation, with activities guided by Traditional Owners and
informed by two-way science. Sea Country projects can support the restoration and
protection of waterways, ensuring cultural knowledge is embedded in environmental
management.
Australian Bushland Program
In the 2025-26 Budget the Government announced the $250 million Australian Bushland
Program to help deliver on the target to protect and conserve 30% of land by 2030. This will
include $13 million funding to further expand the IPA Program to fund at least eight new IPA
consultation projects. This new IPA grant round opened on 13 January and closed on
11 March 2026.
14
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Greens Additional Comments/Recommendations
Response
Recommendation 1.13 That the Australian Government declare the toxic algal bloom a
national disaster.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government does not have a formal ‘national disaster’ declaration. Despite
this, the Australian Government has provided extensive financial support and direct
investment to South Australia, industries and communities affected by the algal bloom event
without requiring any formal declaration to be made.
Recommendation 1.14 That the Australian Government invest $500 million to the Marine
Environment Restoration Fund to enable urgent, large-scale recovery and resilience
projects in South Australian waters, prioritising meaningful reef restoration and seagrass
regeneration.
Response The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government is committed to meaningful protection and restoration of the
marine environment. Further information regarding the Australian Government’s investment
in marine restoration and resilience is detailed in the response to Recommendations 4 and 5.
Recommendation 1.15 That the Australian Government accelerate investment in a
national harmful algal bloom research centre, to lead early warning, rapid response, and
long-term research initiatives.
Response The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Algal Bloom Summer Plan is providing $3.2 million to support the establishment of a
National Office for Algal Bloom Research in South Australia. This office will serve as a
central hub for national integration of algal bloom science and undertake vital long-term
research into the formation, spread and impact of algal bloom events.
Recommendation 1.16 That the Australian Government establish a dedicated Local
Government Climate Resilience Fund to allow quick access to funds for communities
experiencing climate related disasters.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
15
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Local government is the exclusive Constitutional purview of the states and territories which
retain responsibility for the appropriate funding of councils.
The Government has referred the matter of local government funding and fiscal sustainability
to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Regional Development,
Infrastructure and Transport for inquiry. The inquiry will examine the evolving obligations of
local governments as well as the broader system of funding across all levels of government
that supports them.
Recommendation 1.17 That the South Australian Government review their health advice
in light of updated information on the dominant algal species in the bloom and the
presence of brevetoxins being detected in water sampling. Health authorities should
ensure advice is regularly assessed, accessible and transparent.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation and that it is a matter for the South
Australian Government.
16
OFFICIAL
