Australian Government Response to the
Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Defence and Trade
report:
‘Quality and Integrity - the Quest for Sustainable Growth':
Interim Report into International Education
MARCH 2026
Contents
Overview................................................................................................................................................3
Government response............................................................................................................................4
Recommendation 1............................................................................................................................6
Recommendation 2............................................................................................................................8
Recommendation 3............................................................................................................................9
Recommendation 4..........................................................................................................................10
Recommendation 5..........................................................................................................................11
Recommendation 6..........................................................................................................................12
Recommendation 7..........................................................................................................................13
Recommendation 8..........................................................................................................................13
Recommendation 9..........................................................................................................................14
Recommendation 10........................................................................................................................15
Recommendation 11........................................................................................................................15
Recommendation 12........................................................................................................................16
Recommendation 13........................................................................................................................17
Recommendation 14........................................................................................................................18
Recommendation 15........................................................................................................................20
Recommendation 16........................................................................................................................21
Recommendation 17........................................................................................................................22
Recommendation 18........................................................................................................................22
Recommendation 19........................................................................................................................23
Recommendation 20........................................................................................................................24
Recommendation 21........................................................................................................................25
Recommendation 22........................................................................................................................26
Recommendation 23........................................................................................................................26
Recommendation 24........................................................................................................................27
Recommendation 25........................................................................................................................27
Recommendation 26........................................................................................................................27
Recommendation 27........................................................................................................................28
Recommendation 28........................................................................................................................29
Recommendation 29........................................................................................................................29
2
Overview
On 20 October 2022 Senator the Hon Don Farrell, Minister for Trade and Tourism, asked the
Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade (JSCFADT), through its Trade
Subcommittee (the Committee), to inquire into Australia’s tourism and international
education sectors (the Inquiry).
The Inquiry explored the challenges and opportunities presented to both sectors since the
reopening of Australia’s borders in February 2022.
The Terms of Reference (TOR) for the Inquiry were focussed on capturing the challenges in
international education associated with recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic and future
opportunities to support innovation, a positive student experience for international students,
and strategic and foreign policy objectives. The TOR in full is available on the Inquiry’s home
page).
The Committee tabled its interim report on 19 October 2023. The report includes
29 recommendations for the international education sector, addressing issues raised through
the hearings. Key themes include education and migration agents, skilled-work pathways,
new and expanding markets and market development, regulation and accreditation bodies,
data and reporting, transparency, and communication with students. The majority of
recommendations focus on the integrity of the sector.
3
Government response
The Australian Government welcomes the interim report titled ’Quality and Integrity - the
Quest for Sustainable Growth': Interim Report into International Education’. The Government
notes the recommendations broadly align with its priorities and recent reforms to strengthen
the quality and integrity of the international education sector.
International education is a great Australian success story. It is Australia’s fourth largest
export sector, behind coal, iron ore and natural gas1. International students bring significant
value to our communities, classrooms and campuses. Our international education system
must have the right settings to provide the highest quality experience for all students and
maintain Australia’s world-class reputation for delivering education.
The Australian Government released the Draft International Education and Skills Strategic
Framework (draft Framework) on 11 May 2024. Under the draft Framework, the Government
committed to implementing a managed system for international education, to support
sustainable growth and ensure that Australia remains a prestige, high-quality, high-integrity
provider of international education. Government remains committed to finalising the
Framework in cooperation with the international education sector.
On 18 December 2024, the Government introduced Ministerial Direction 111 (MD111)– Order
for considering and disposing of offshore Subclass 500 (Student) visa applications. MD111
supported a more sustainable international education sector through changes to the
prioritisation of resources for student visa processing under the 2025 National Planning level
(NPL) of 270,000 New Overseas Student Commencements (NOSCs).
On 14 November 2025, MD111 was replaced with Ministerial Direction 115 (MD115) – Order
for considering and disposing of offshore Subclass 500 (Student) visa applications to guide
student visa processing priorities for 2026, in line with indicative NOSC allocations.
The Hon Julian Hill MP was appointed as Assistant Minister for International Education in
May 2025, in recognition of the important role international education plays for Australia.
In August 2025, Government announced policy settings for a managed international
education system, underpinned by an NPL of 295,000 NOSCs for 2026 and incentives for
providers who make a genuine effort toward greater diversification and improved student
wellbeing, including through the provision of adequate student accommodation.
In November 2025, the Education Legislation Amendment (Integrity and Other Measures) Bill
2025 (the ELA Bill) was passed by Parliament, improving protection for genuine international
students who have chosen to study in Australia and securing the sector’s reputation both
domestically and overseas. The ELA Bill reintroduced integrity amendments from the
Government’s lapsed Education Services for Overseas Students Amendment (Quality and
Integrity) Bill 2024. It also introduced new measures that will enhance the Tertiary Education
Quality and Standards Agency’s (TEQSA) oversight of offshore course delivery by registered
Australian higher education providers.
1 Education export income - Financial Year - Department of Education, Australian Government
4
In the interim report the Committee recognised the need for determined and focused actions
against unscrupulous providers to combat the systemic exploitation of Australia’s education
and migration systems and better regulate education agents, ensuring Australia remains a
place where the best and brightest students can come and get the best education in the
world. Government will continue to act to prevent the exploitation of students and protect
Australia’s reputation as a high-quality international education provider. This Australian
Government Response outlines several key reforms which address issues raised in the interim
report.
5
Recommendations and Responses
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends the Government lead a ‘Team Australia’ program to build a
stronger national international education brand and platform and agree on a five-year
prioritised Market Diversification Plan. An enhanced Team Australia approach will:
• better coordinate through shared agreements, Australian Government agencies
(Department of Education, Department of Home Affairs, Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations and Austrade), state and territory
governments and the sector
• build and maintain a national platform and approach to promote Australia’s quality
education within a fiercely competitive international arena
• address issues of fragmentation, duplication, and divisive competition in the current
marketing of Australian education to the world.
Team Australia should prioritise the development of a five-year Market Diversification Plan
into new and emerging geographic markets. The five-year plan should have shared
governance and be resourced across the sector including federal, state and territory
contributions. The plan should:
• identify and agree on a limited number of priority countries for joint focus in
sub-Saharan Africa, Southeast Asia and South and Central America (considering for
example Nigeria, Kenya, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Indonesia, Vietnam, the Philippines,
Brazil, Colombia and Chile)
• consider innovative ways to fund places for students of the Blue Pacific to study in
Australia and seek to deepen international education ties within the Pacific Island
Development (PID) Forum to advance democracy and support peace and prosperity
within our region
• form agreed migration and education settings to enable and encourage the best
and brightest international students from identified priority countries to study in
Australia, including Department of Home Affairs permitting lead providers to take
approved and calculated risks in the early phases of market development without
affecting their visa ratings
• drive diversification of education offerings in traditional markets, with a focus on
India
• be jointly resourced by both the Government (via Austrade) and the sector,
potentially via a light touch time-limited marketing levy on Commonwealth Register
of Institutions and Courses for Overseas Students (CRICOS) providers subject to
shared governance so those who pay a levy have influence over how it is spent.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
Team Australia
The Government is committed to a ‘Team Australia’ approach, encompassing Commonwealth
departments and agencies, states and territories, peak bodies, and education providers.
The Australian Trade and Investment Commission (Austrade) is the Australian Government
agency with responsibility for promoting Australian education globally. Austrade is the
6
custodian of Australia’s Nation Brand and uses this branding when promoting Australia’s
education sector internationally, as Study Australia, including through supported use of the
Study Australia Marketing (and Brand) Toolkit. Austrade also aggregates and disseminates
whole-of-government information to global audiences via the Study Australia website, digital,
and social channels. Additionally, Austrade is the policy, program, and official statistics lead
for tourism, which incorporates international education as a significant source of travellers.
Austrade’s work in international education is complemented by close engagement with the
Australian Government Department of Education, including leveraging the department’s role
in driving policy development with priority partner countries to support qualifications and
course recognition, greater systems alignment, and addressing barriers to growth. Austrade
works closely with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT), including on the
implementation of education and skills sector recommendations in Invested: Australia’s
Southeast Asia Economic Strategy to 2040; recent collaborative activities include Southeast
Asia Business Exchange (SEABX) business missions focused on education, skills, and
transnational education.
Austrade also works with states and territories through the Study Australia Partnership – a
formal collaboration between Austrade and all state and territory study destination agencies,
to co-design and execute projects that support and promote Australia’s international
education sector.
Diversification
The Government recognises the critical importance of market diversification to the
sustainability of Australia’s international education sector. Engagement with Southeast Asia
is an Australian Government priority and policy settings in the managed growth approach
incentivise international education providers to increasingly diversify to this region.
Diversification of international education markets also supports the visiting friends and
relatives' (VFR) segment of Australia’s visitor economy. As noted in the International
Diversification Strategy for the Visitor Economy Discussion Paper and related industry
consultations, a proposed focus on growing VFR travel from the new and emerging markets
of India and Southeast Asia would have strong synergies with international education
diversification.
In line with the Government’s Southeast Asia 2040 strategy, Austrade is supporting
engagement with Southeast Asia through SEABX, with regional trade missions involving 72
Australian education and skills providers to date.
International education sector diversification extends beyond student source countries,
encompassing learner types, courses and fields of study, modes and models of delivery, and
locations of study within Australia and internationally (for example, transnational education
or building on the collaborative foundations of the Study Australia Partnership).
The Government will continue to work closely with the regulators, the Tertiary Education
Quality and Standards Agency (TEQSA) and the Australian Skills Quality Authority (ASQA), to
guide education and training providers expanding and diversifying their operations through
offshore (in-country) delivery. The Government will also continue to support the sector to
engage with international governments on accessing opportunities through qualifications
7
recognition and in-country delivery provisions enabled by bilateral trade agreements and
cooperation.
Diversification opportunities will also be considered in the context of the Australian
Government’s International Education and Skills Strategic Framework, once finalised.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends the Government work with the sector to develop a more
systemic approach to tracking and supporting alumni networks, including graduates of
Australian education scholarships and programs, with the explicit aim of fostering enduring
connections to Australia, with a focus on priority countries and strengthening Australia’s
international research networks and partnerships.
The Australian Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Government is committed to working with the sector (with its buy-in being essential) on
improving approaches to alumni networks, in line with recommendations outlined in
Invested: Australia’s Southeast Asia Economic Strategy to 2040 and the Australian Universities
Accord Final Report.
The Government recognises the value in enhancing personal and professional relationships
forged between international scholars and the Australian community. It will continue to build
on the success of alumni networks such as the Australia Awards alumni, New Colombo Plan
(NCP), and other programs to identify more systematic and engaging ways to work with
scholarship and self-funded alumni to deepen engagement in the Pacific and Southeast Asia.
The recent reforms to the NCP will deepen the program’s business engagement and provide
more ways to foster scholar and alumni engagement through relationship building with the
private sector and business stakeholders. NCP initiatives, including the Alumni Representative
Program and Alumni Consultative Group, provide support to engaged NCP alumni to promote
the program and foster networks across the Indo-Pacific.
Work is ongoing to consolidate existing IT systems into a single solution or to strengthen
existing systems to better support current needs.
DFAT has established an ‘Australia Awards Global Support Mechanism’ to deliver a coherent
suite of Australia Awards services, including dedicated long term advisory support to bolster
alumni engagement across the network of overseas posts. In addition to supporting the
development of consistent and measurable alumni strategies at posts across Southeast Asia,
the Government will further explore ‘opt-in’ approaches to tracking and convening alumni.
8
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends the Government examine opportunities to expand programs
that deliver development support to Australia’s near neighbours and contribute to
Australian skills needs through practical on and offshore education and training
‘International traineeships’, with an initial focus on aged care and allied health in regional
Australia. International Traineeships should be limited to Technical and Further Education
providers (TAFEs) and approved Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) and companies
to maintain integrity.
The Australian Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Government will examine opportunities to expand skills-related support through
international traineeships where critical skills shortages exist in the region. Skills and technical
and vocational education and training (TVET) are integral to economic success and improved
development outcomes. In March 2023, the inaugural Conference of Pacific Education
Ministers agreed that developing skills pathways is a collective priority for the region.
The Government supports this priority in the Pacific. DFAT’s pilot of on-the-job training of
Pacific Australia Labour Mobility (PALM) scheme workers in the aged care sector in the
Northern Territory and Queensland, informed the expansion of training through the PALM
scheme. In April 2025, DFAT’s Office of the Pacific introduced a new, regional skills program,
Pacific Australian Skills, continuing Australia’s longstanding support for skills and training in
the region, following the conclusion of the Australia Pacific Training Coalition (APTC, 2008 –
2025). Pacific Australia Skills builds on the strong legacy of APTC, focusing on skills for
employment and links with industry.
The Government’s development partnerships in Southeast Asia include a strong focus on
education and skills in Official Development Assistance (ODA) eligible countries such as
Indonesia, Vietnam, the Philippines and throughout ASEAN. These partnerships build links
with Australian institutions through the International Development Policy framework and
programs such as Australia Awards scholarships, fellowships and short courses, and the New
Colombo Plan. The Policy guides investment in partner-led initiatives that improve schooling,
vocational training, and employment services. This will help build regional capacity, develop
future leaders and leverage Australia’s education institutions to further connect the region to
Australia.
The Government is also establishing a new specialised scholarship program complementing
Australia Awards, as well as expanding Australia Award Scholarships to Brunei, Malaysia,
Singapore and Thailand. Additionally, a new Placements and Internships Pilot Program for
Young Professionals (an initial $6 million over four years) to help build enduring links between
Australian and Southeast Asian businesses.
Under a system of managed growth, universities will be able to grow their student allocation
where they demonstrate continued investment in Southeast Asia through their education
9
offerings, partnerships, campuses, alumni and scholarships. This will help drive Australia’s
economic, people-to-people links and two-way cultural exchange.
The Government exempts students from the Pacific and Timor-Leste from the prioritisation
of offshore Subclass 500 (student) visa applications under Ministerial Direction 115, in
recognition of Australia’s commitment to strengthening education and employment
pathways with the region. This exemption extends to other visa applications, including those
students with an Australian Government sponsored scholarship and key foreign partner
government scholarship holders, and students studying at an Australian education provider
delivering education services internationally under a transnational education agreement.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends the Government engage with the international education
sector and industry bodies to develop and implement targeted campaigns to educate
employers on the opportunities to hire international student graduates in sectors with high
skilled job vacancies. Campaigns must combat employer confusion and misinformation
about graduate work rights, visa conditions and pathways to permanent residency (where
available). The first campaign focus should be for engineering, information technology and
health industries, followed by other skilled occupations identified in high demand.
The Australian Government agrees in-principle with this recommendation.
The Government notes the proposal for further information strategies and campaigns as
outlined in this recommendation, as well as Recommendation 20.
The Government currently engages with the international education sector, industry bodies
and employers to support awareness of rights and opportunities in the sector. The
Government recognises there is value in improving employers’ understanding of the benefits
that international graduates can provide, including through addressing confusion or
misinformation about graduate work rights, visa conditions and pathways to permanent
residency.
The Government supports improving clarity around rights, obligations, and employment
opportunities for the international education sector, and will continue to consult with the
sector to develop information products in line with recommendations outlined in the
Migration Strategy, Working Future: The Australian Government’s White Paper on Jobs and
Opportunities (Employment White Paper), and the International Students Pathways and
Outcomes Study by Jobs and Skills Australia.
10
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends the Government establish a national work-integrated
learning framework to oversight work-integrated learning placements. The
work-integrated learning framework and any accompanying system changes should be
developed in consultation with the international education sector, industry peak bodies
and accreditation bodies and the work-integrated learning peak body, taking into
consideration Fair Work Requirements and ensuring robust oversight of providers and
businesses to prevent student exploitation and integrity loopholes.
The work-integrated learning accreditation system should support the integration of
accreditation placements into the work-integrated learning program, where appropriate.
Further sandwich courses, higher education apprenticeships and other paid work and learn
integrated models of study are increasingly common in jurisdictions with whom Australia
competes for international students. These models offer better integration between
industry and educational entities, and should be given immediate consideration by a
taskforce established by the Government.
The Australian Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of work integrated learning to support
international students to enhance their workplace and employability skills and graduate
employment outcomes, while also ensuring that there is appropriate oversight of providers
and businesses to comply with workplace relations laws including the Fair Work Act 2009, and
to prevent, detect and remedy the exploitation of students.
The benefits for international students of work experience and volunteering during their
studies is well documented. Through these experiences, international students build
networks, develop their English language skills, and build the skills and attributes necessary
to find work in their field of study.
This recommendation aligns with the 2022 Post Study Work Rights Working Group Report to
the Ministers for Education and Home Affairs which notes that “additional work experience
during their studies can also assist graduates to be more work ready upon graduation”.
The Government agrees to establish a work integrated learning working group to consider
this recommendation in the context of other key government reforms, including the
Employment White Paper, the Australian Universities Accord Final Report, the Migration
Strategy, Invested: Australia’s Southeast Asia Economic Strategy to 2040, and the
International Students Pathways and Outcomes Study by Jobs and Skills Australia. The
Government has also committed to deepen engagement in Southeast Asia through Invested:
Australia’s Southeast Asia Economic Strategy to 2040 including encouraging universities and
vocational education providers to offer work-integrated learning internships as part of course
offerings to Southeast Asian students.
11
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends the Government take a pro-active, interventionist approach
in reviewing unreasonable barriers to qualified international student graduates filling skills
shortage roles that are imposed by professional accreditation bodies, to identify
opportunities to streamline and remove unnecessary requirements while preserving
quality assurance. The Committee recommends these reviews target and assess, as a
matter of priority, accreditation barriers and issues encountered by qualified international
graduates in health and allied health professional fields. There should be a specific focus on
accreditation issues in nursing, midwifery, and psychology, then professional trades and
other critical skills shortage areas, as they emerge.
Consideration should be given to improving pathways to apprenticeships and work
placements for both vocational education and training and university degrees for
international students where skills shortages cannot be met domestically.
The Australian Government agrees in-principle with this recommendation.
The Government notes this recommendation aligns with work undertaken by DFAT on Mutual
Recognition Agreements for Professional Qualifications. The Government will further
consider matters relating to priority skills areas in line with the Migration Strategy, Australian
Universities Accord Final Report, the Employment White Paper, and the International
Students Pathways and Outcomes Study by Jobs and Skills Australia.
The Government recognises that occupations are generally subject to state and territory
licensing and regulatory oversight, with health and allied health professions being nationally
regulated by the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (AHPRA).
The Government recently released the Guiding Principles and Standards for Skilled Migration
Assessing Authorities (the Guide) (effective 1 October 2025) to improve the approach to skills
assessments for migration purposes. The Guide will be supported by new legislative powers
to impose conditions on assessing authorities. The completion of this work represents a
significant milestone in the journey towards greater integrity and assurance measures in skills
assessments. The Government will continue to work closely with industry,
migrant representatives, assessing authorities and other stakeholders to understand the
opportunities for systemic changes to lift the sector and strengthen its role within the broader
skills, employment and migration system.
As noted in the response to Recommendation 5, the Government recognises that work
placements more broadly are critical to post-study employment outcomes, and will consider
opportunities to further improve access to placements for international students, including
in the context of other key government reforms.
12
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommends, in light of the highly dynamic nature of the international
education sector and global markets and the continuously evolving policy and regulatory
frameworks, an appropriate Parliamentary Committee hold a regular annual or biennial
‘check-in’ inquiry, either stand-alone or as part of a routine annual report inquiry by the
Trade Subcommittee of the Joint Standing Committee of Foreign Affairs Defence and Trade.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends the Government develop an International Education Compact
for the endorsement of National Cabinet, to clarify the roles and responsibilities of
respective levels of government regarding the quality and integrity standards of Australia’s
international education system and to improve international student experience. Such
responsibilities, for example, may confirm:
• the Federal Government has lead responsibility for visa policy and processing,
quality regulation (with states and territories referring Vocational Education and
Training (VET) regulatory powers where necessary), agent regulation, leading the
international marketing of Australian education (in collaboration with states and
territories), consumer protection (including tuition protection schemes) and
prevention of workplace exploitation for students
• state and territory governments have lead responsibility for domestic transport
including committing to uniform public transport concessions, accommodation,
student welfare, community integration measures such as volunteering and
participation in Australian community life and celebrating the contribution that
international students make to Australian society, and destination marketing in
collaboration with the Commonwealth
• local council mayors have a special leadership role in fostering a culture of
welcoming students into Australian communities and championing community
inclusion
• a proposal that the Governor-General, State Governors and Territory
Administrators host an annual reception with leading international students or
sector and civic awards to recognise the contribution that international students
make to Australia and champion greater community inclusion
• shared responsibility to support the Council of International Students Australia
(CISA) and similar international student organisations to build their capabilities as a
support and resource bridge between domestic and international students, and for
new international students to acclimatise to Australian life.
The Australian Government agrees in-principle with this recommendation.
13
The Government works closely with states and territories through the Study Australia
partnerships and regular meetings of the Commonwealth States and Territories International
Education Stakeholder Forum to ensure a quality student experience for international
students and enhanced community engagement. States and territories also celebrate the
contribution that international students make to Australian society through annual
international student award ceremonies. The Government notes the utility in confirming the
roles and responsibilities of different levels of government.
The Government recognises the importance of a sustainable and representative student voice
in policy development and implementation as well as within individual institutions.
Recommendation 9
The Committee recommends the Government use its convening power to encourage state
and territory governments, local government authorities and universities to develop
appropriate local accommodation models including home stay in their respective
jurisdictions to help alleviate pressing student accommodation issues and deepen
connections between international students and Australian society, highlighting the tax
advantages for Australians who host up to two international students.
Best Practice Home Stay models should be informed by the Gold Coast Council's ‘Host for
Coast’ program and developed in consultation with established reputable homestay
organisations such as the Australian Homestay Network and international education peak
bodies and include:
• formal eligibility review processes and ongoing quality assurance
• strong risk management focus in the lower end of the education provider market to
prevent accommodation exploitation, and forms of worker exploitation such as
rental debt bondage
• focus on home stay opportunities that support providers and communities in
regional Australia
• a specific focus on home stay support for (domestic and international student)
regional placements.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Government is working with state and territory, local governments and education
providers to develop accommodation models to increase the provision of student
accommodation, to ensure both domestic and international students have access to safe and
secure housing.
14
Recommendation 10
The Committee recommends the Government urgently work to foster the expansion of the
Purpose-Built Student Accommodation (PBSA) sector including:
• examining mechanisms to boost domestic and superannuation fund investment
into PBSA (as the majority of capital invested at present is foreign) including support
for a new asset class of PBSA, recognising that it is now a mature and specialist
housing product
• engaging with state, territory and local governments to remove planning and
development impediments to PBSA developments
• working with regional universities and considering incentives to support PBSA
developments in regional Australia.
The Australian Government agrees in-principle with this recommendation.
The Government recognises the critical role of Purpose-Built Student Accommodation (PBSA)
to alleviate accommodation shortages, particularly in the student market. There is a growing
pipeline of additional PBSA, with more than 11,000 beds under construction, more than
15,000 with development approvals in place and over 12,000 in the planning process.
The Government has made clear to publicly funded universities that increasing the provision
of safe and secure student accommodation for both domestic and international students,
including through PBSA, is a priority. This priority is reflected in policy settings for a managed
system of international education in Australia. In its settings for 2026, the Government
established an application process for universities through which they can apply for an
increase in their New Overseas Student Commencement (NOSC) allocation, with student
accommodation as one of the key factors against which applications are assessed.
The Government will further consider this recommendation in line with other Government
reforms, including the Housing Australia Future Fund, the measures from the National
Housing Accord, the Australian Universities Accord Final Report, as well as guidance from the
recently established National Housing Supply and Affordability Council.
Recommendation 11
The Committee recommends the Government review and consider the desirability of the
widespread practice in the university sector whereby universities establish Central Business
District (CBD) campuses largely comprising international students and sub-contract the
teaching to private institutions. This could be considered as part of the University Accord
process and may warrant adjustments to funding formulas to ensure genuine regional
universities in particular are adequately funded and not forced in effect to chase revenue
in this manner.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
15
The Government is committed to supporting regional universities, ensuring they are
adequately funded and that the students receive a quality education.
The Government will further consider how to support regional universities to thrive in line
with other Government reforms, including implementation of recommendations in the
Australian Universities Accord Final Report with demand-driven Needs-based Funding for
students studying at regional campuses commencing from 2026. Measures to guide the
international education sector towards greater sustainability will continue through a
managed growth approach, which is currently being implemented through changes to the
prioritisation of resources for offshore student visa processing under a National Planning
Level.
Where a provider delivers a course with a third party, the Higher Education Standards (HES)
Framework requires higher education providers to remain responsible and accountable in all
aspects of course delivery and support. TEQSA may apply a greater focus in ensuring
compliance is effectively implemented by the higher education provider. TEQSA also expects
students have equivalent opportunity to successfully transition into and through their course
of study irrespective of educational background, mode, delivery arrangement or place of
study.
Recommendation 12
The Committee recommends the Government significantly improve data sharing between
agencies to address serious integrity concerns, including formal information and sharing
agreements and platforms between the Department of Home Affairs, the Department of
Education, Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Agency (TEQSA), Australian Skills
Quality Authority (ASQA), and where appropriate, the Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Austrade and the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations.
Government should form or utilise an existing cross agency expert group to oversee the
development of these platforms to ensure:
• legislative basis and privacy considerations are appropriately addressed without
preventing the effective sharing of information
• platforms are sufficiently resourced to rapidly identify and track high-risk
behaviours by education providers, education agents and related third parties and
have capacity to map such behaviours to international student movements and
student visa data
• platforms can inform more effective and timely regulatory action to deter and
disrupt international student exploitation and safeguard Australian international
education and visa integrity.
The Australian Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Government is exploring further reforms around data expansion as outlined in
Recommendations 12, 13, 18, 23, and 26, and notes the actions in this recommendation are
being progressed.
16
The Government is committed to enhancing data sharing capability between regulatory
agencies, in alignment with the Government’s response to the Nixon Review.
Broader data sharing detailed in this recommendation will be investigated over the longer
term in line with the strategic priorities of Government and areas of responsibility for relevant
agencies.
The Government regards agencies working together to share intelligence, identifying areas
for regulatory action and treating shared risks in international education, as a critical
component to ensuring integrity in the sector. Government has established a cross-agency
committee consisting of ESOS agencies and Commonwealth departments, with a focus on
information sharing on integrity risks to the sector.
Recommendation 13
The Committee recommends the Government use whatever means at its disposal to
compel education providers to develop information channels across sectors to share
credible information and concerns regarding education agents, entities and student
movements to inform and support integrity in student recruitment and delivery of
international education and to disrupt non-genuine students and other entities seeking to
exploit the international education sector, the student visa system, and international
students.
The Australian Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Government has positive working relationships with the sector and will continue to build
conduits to share information related to risks to the integrity of Australia's international
education system. The Government remains committed to ensuring the quality, integrity and
sustainable growth of Australia’s international education sector and working with the sector
to achieve this goal.
The ELA Act contains robust elements to increase information sharing on education agents to
support providers to choose ethical, high performing agents. Integrity reforms in the Act
complement the changes to the Student Visa Program through strengthening regulations for
education providers and disrupting and deterring non-genuine education providers and
students.
17
Recommendation 14
The Committee recommends the Government take firm action to address persistent and
deep-seated integrity issues in the private Vocational Education and Training (VET) sector,
understanding this will be a difficult and long-term reform program. Actions may require
legislative changes to strengthen regulatory oversight and tough decisions and could
include:
• structural reforms to improve the monitoring and assessment of current providers
and increase vetting of new providers including a fit and proper person test to
operate a VET provider
• a pause for at least 12 months by Australian Skills Quality Authority (ASQA) in
processing new provider applications for Commonwealth Register of Institutions
and Courses for Overseas Students (CRICOS) registered VET providers, with limited
exceptions for legitimate applications such as industry linked entities, high
economic value proposals or those endorsed by state and territory governments
• requiring new providers seeking CRICOS registration to have operated and delivered
to domestic students for at least 12 months
• suspension of recruitment of international students to CRICOS VET courses
identified with persistent quality and integrity issues and/or of limited value to
Australia’s critical skills needs, such as management and leadership courses.
• automatic suspension of new international student intake for providers under
serious regulatory investigation
• cancellation of a provider’s CRICOS registration if no training is delivered for a
period of 12 months or more
• an ongoing boost to the resources available to ASQA for compliance and
enforcement of VET regulatory and quality requirements over time.
The Australian Government agrees in-principle with this recommendation.
The Government is committed to ensuring integrity and quality in Australia’s international
and domestic VET sector. These issues are complex and require a coordinated approach
across government agencies.
The ELA Bill passed by Parliament on 28 November 2025 included a range of integrity
measures to strengthen the international education regulatory framework by amending the
Education Services for Overseas Students Act 2000 (the ESOS Act).
These measures directly address the recommendation, including by:
• strengthening the criteria for determining whether a provider is ‘fit and proper’ to
include consideration of cross-ownership arrangements and any current
investigation for specified offences;
• requiring VET providers, except for TAFEs, to first deliver courses to domestic
students for two years before they can apply for registration to teach overseas
students;
18
• automatically cancelling CRICOS registration of ‘dormant’ providers – that is, any
provider that has not delivered any registered course to any overseas student at any
onshore location for a period of 12 consecutive months;
• enabling the Minister for Education, with agreement of the Minister for Skills and
Training for the VET sector, to pause the making or processing of CRICOS applications
for new providers or courses for up to 12 months; and
• enabling the Minister for Education, with agreement of the Minister for Skills and
Training for the VET sector, to suspend or cancel specified classes of CRICOS courses
where:
o there are or have been systemic issues in relation to the standard of delivery
of the courses included in the class;
o the courses provide limited value to Australia’s current, emerging and future
skills and training needs and priorities;
o it is in the public interest to do so.
In the 2023-24 Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook (MYEFO), the Government announced
a package of $37.8 million for measures to improve integrity in the VET system and
protections for students. The measures have supported the national VET regulator, ASQA, to
strengthen its regulatory activities by:
• establishing a new Integrity Unit within ASQA,
• upgrading ASQA’s digital and data systems to identify and respond to potentially illegal
activity in the sector,
• establishing a confidential VET tip-off line for reports of serious non-compliance and
illegal activity.
The Government has also taken swift action to strengthen the Fit and Proper Person
Requirements under the National Vocational Education and Training Regulator Act 2011
(NVETR Act). These changes provided ASQA with increased powers to scrutinise those who
are in the business of managing or operating Registered Training Organisations (RTOs).
The Government is also lifting the quality and integrity of training within the VET sector
through the release of revised Standards for Registered Training Organisations (RTOs) 2015
with 2025 Standards for Registered Training Organisations (2025 Standards). The 2025
Standards for RTOs came into effect on 1 July 2025 and strengthen the focus on quality
outcomes for learners and employers, provide greater clarity around expectations, and allow
for more flexibility and innovation in training delivery across the sector.
The Government made amendments to the NVETR Act in early 2024 to ensure ASQA has the
necessary regulatory tools to take swift action to address integrity risks posed by non-genuine
or unscrupulous RTOs and lift quality across the VET sector.
In the 2024-25 MYEFO, the Government committed $7.7 million over four years from 2024–
25 (and $0.4 million per year ongoing) to enable ASQA to deliver additional integrity activities
for Australia’s international vocational education and training sector, working closely with
sector regulators.
19
Additionally, in the 2025-26 Budget, the government committed $4.7 million in surge funding
for ASQA. This funding will enable ASQA to immediately respond to fraud in the VET sector,
particularly where providers are issuing fraudulent qualifications.
The Government is committed to ensuring Australia’s VET system delivers world-class training
while protecting students and quality providers. Government will continue to investigate
further improvements to the regulatory framework and enhance quality requirements for
VET delivery. Implementation of improvements would require careful consideration to ensure
intended outcomes are achieved.
Recommendation 15
The Committee recommends the Government implement or at least trial major reforms to
how international student learning is assessed, and education quality assured for high-risk
Vocational Education and Training (VET) providers and courses by working with the States
and Territories to consider the following options:
• developing a framework to assess all 932 Commonwealth Register of Institutions
and Courses for Overseas Students (CRICOS) registered VET providers (excluding
public Technical and Further Education providers (TAFEs)) to identify higher risk
providers – the framework should be equitable and transparent, informed by both
quantitative and qualitative information, though not all data sources and aspects
may be public
• subjecting identified higher risk providers to stricter compliance and accreditation
requirements which may include:
o trialling external assessments of a random selection of students from high-
risk providers / courses to accurately assess education training quality,
identify systemic issues and provide Australian Skills Quality Authority
(ASQA) with better evidence to respond with and cancel the registration of
non-genuine poor-quality providers, more rapidly
o a full re-accreditation process for providers identified as posing the highest
integrity and quality risks where providers would have to reapply for their
registration with ASQA
o a mechanism to separate the training function from the assessment function
in limited circumstances for high-risk providers and / or course, requiring
students to be externally assessed by an independent body or by a provider
approved (such as TAFEs or a proven high-quality private provider permitted
to undertake external assessments).
All of the above initiatives would be provider funded on a cost-recovery basis.
The Australian Government agrees in-principle with this recommendation.
The Government is strongly committed to ensuring a high-quality vocational education and
training (VET) sector with oversight by the national VET regulator, ASQA, delivering a risk-
based approach to regulation.
20
ASQA manages the registration of all providers based on risk and has an ongoing risk focus on
CRICOS providers. ASQA’s measures to support greater integrity in the international
education system, supported by a significant uplift in its digital and data systems continues to
build ASQA’s compliance, investigative and enforcement capabilities. The most effective
approach is to engage with those providers on whether they meet the threshold for
registration – at any stage in their registration cycle.
As outlined in Recommendation 14, Government is lifting the quality and integrity of training
within the VET sector through the release of revised Standards for Registered Training
Organisations (RTOs). The 2025 revised Standards for RTOs will strengthen the focus on
quality outcomes for learners and employers, provide greater clarity around expectations,
and allow for more flexibility and innovation in training delivery across the sector.
In line with a focus on quality outcomes, the 2025 Standards for RTOs support a more flexible
approach to delivery and regulation and complement ASQA’s risk-based approach. A
significant and ongoing program of engagement has been undertaken to facilitate the
transition to the 2025 Standards, including to build RTO understanding and capability for
operating under the 2025 Standards. Commencing in October 2024, this program of
engagement included the development of educative and supporting resources, policy
guidance, and a significant program of face-to-face and virtual workshops conducted by ASQA
with providers across the country.
The Government remains committed to managing the sector at sustainable levels, creating a
better and fairer system, and addressing integrity issues in international education. Measures
included in the ELA Act strengthen integrity and support quality in the sector.
Recommendation 16
The Committee recommends the Government consider differentiating visa applications for
international students who choose to study at Technical and Further Education providers
(TAFEs). Further considerations to support TAFEs should include:
• Disaggregating Vocational Education and Training (VET) immigration data so that
TAFE applications are reported separately
• supporting the Department of Home Affairs to apply a risk regime that recognises
TAFEs genuine commitment to providing a quality experience for international
students, by providing TAFEs with the same benefits/recognition as universities
under the Simplified Student Visa Framework (SSVF).
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Government will further consider this recommendation, in line with its response to the
Nixon Review, which advocates for several reforms to protect students from unscrupulous
private VET providers.
21
Recommendation 17
The Committee recommends the Government review international education regulatory
bodies to ensure the settings and frameworks empower proactive risk analysis, on-the-
ground quality assurance practices and that individual complaints, especially complaints by
students, are investigated within an efficient timeframe. The review should consider how:
• agencies could maintain a list of ‘red flagged’ individuals and entities subject to
serious regulatory action or serious integrity concerns, increase the degree and
scope of penalties, and regulators could be empowered to be able to investigate
provider and education agent or equivalent relationships
• increase the capacity and resourcing of international regulatory bodies over time to
enable the agencies to effectively conduct randomised provider checks including
site visits and conduct scaled investigations into high-risk provider behaviour
• ensure resourcing is sufficient so that agencies are equipped and capably resourced
to take full advantage of, and contribute to cross-agency intelligence data gathering,
pursue individual student complaints/whistleblowing allegations, and be able to
report annual monitoring and investigation KPIs to be set by Government.
The Australian Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Government notes that the actions responding to this recommendation are covered by
its response to the Nixon Review. In its response, Government has undertaken significant
uplifts of regulatory capacity.
In the 2023-24 MYEFO, the Government announced a package of $37.8 million for measures
to improve integrity in the VET system and protections for students. The measures have
supported the national VET regulator, ASQA, to strengthen its regulatory activities by:
• establishing a new Integrity Unit within ASQA,
• upgrading ASQA’s digital and data systems to identify and respond to potentially illegal
activity in the sector,
• establishing a confidential VET tip-off line for reports of serious non-compliance and
illegal activity.
The Government is continuing cross agency work to support ESOS agencies to share and
integrate data holdings and to support ongoing development of evidence-based risk
indicators to inform compliance actions by the education regulators.
Recommendation 18
The Committee recommends the Government amend Quality Indicators for Teaching and
Learning (QILT) Surveys to include questions about education agents and equivalents that
would provide more detailed information of the agent student interactions.
The Australian Government agrees with this recommendation.
22
The Government has worked with the QILT contractor to include questions about education
agents and equivalents for the 2025 Student Experience Survey.
Recommendation 19
The Committee recommends the Government:
• review and improve protections for international students to safely report
workplace exploitation, including reviewing the Assurance Protocol to ensure that
students who report exploitation are protected from visa cancellation
• examine the scale and use of Australian Business Numbers (ABNs) by international
students to ensure this is not being abused as a device by employers to exploit
students
• consider a scheme of endorsement of ABN requests by international students that
require oversight by their educational institution
• consider requiring employers to undertake a very light touch registration when they
employ international students (or potentially any temporary migrant), for example
a simple website registration, enabling the Fair Work Ombudsman to undertake
more targeted enforcement and to fine businesses found to be employing
unregistered workers.
The Australian Government agrees in-principle with this recommendation.
The Government has zero tolerance for exploitation of migrant workers, including
international students.
In July 2024, the Government implemented a pilot to strengthen reporting protections for a
range of temporary visa holders, including international students. This pilot was co-designed
with a targeted group of unions and civil society organisations with expertise in workplace
relations. The design recognised that without appropriate protections for both their current
and any future visa, some temporary migrants have been too afraid to try to resolve
workplace exploitation, or to support investigations or pursue litigation against dishonest
employers. This is a key element of the package of reforms to address migrant worker
exploitation announced by Government in June 2023, in line with commitments made at the
2022 Jobs and Skills Summit.
The Government has driven broader legislative reform to deter the misclassification of
employees as independent contractors through its Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing
Loopholes No. 2) Act 2024. The Act changes the defence to misrepresenting employment as
an independent contractor arrangement (i.e. ‘sham contracting’) from a test of ‘recklessness’
to one of ‘reasonableness’. The effect of this change is to impose a more objective test. This
means that an employer’s ignorance or unreasonable mistake will no longer allow them to
make out the defence and avoid liability for sham contracting. The Act also substantially
increases the maximum penalties for bodies corporate that are not small business employers
that are found to have engaged in sham contracting in the Fair Work Act 2009.
23
For the purposes of examining the scale and use of ABNs, the Australian Business Registrar
currently shares ABN non-public information with eligible government agencies. The
Government will consider a scheme of endorsement of ABN requests by international
students overseen by education institutions. The recommendation to have ABN requests to
be overseen by educational institutions raises several policy and legal issues, including
considering how such a scheme would fit with the existing ABN obligations, and whether it
would achieve the desired outcome. The recommendation would also require policy and law
change.
Consistent with the direction in the Migration Strategy and the development of a public
register for employer sponsors in the temporary skilled program, Government will in future
consider if this register can extend to businesses that employ other temporary migrants
where workers are particularly susceptible to exploitation.
Recommendation 20
The Committee recommends cross government agencies and the sector intensify efforts in
implementing a targeted communication strategy to educate:
• international students of their rights and obligations when studying in Australia
• providers and education agents of their obligations to international students
studying in Australia
• employers and industries that are high employers of international students.
The Australian Government agrees in-principle with this recommendation.
The Study Australia website and social channels are official Australian Government sources of
information and referral for international students, agents, parents, school counsellors and
other stakeholders.
Study Australia channels aggregate and disseminate whole-of-government information to a
global audience. Austrade works closely with Commonwealth agencies, as well as Australian
state and territory study destination agencies, to ensure the provision of accurate and up-to-
date information, including on rights and obligations, and relevant tools and directions to
providers, students and other stakeholders. Austrade also actively engages with global
education agents via the Study Australia Agent Hub, a dedicated resource for education
agents.
Education providers are required under the ESOS Act and the National Code of Practice for
Providers of Education and Training to Overseas Students 2018 to provide information on
student rights and responsibilities, as learners and as employees in Australia. The Department
of Home Affairs, as the responsible agency, disseminates information relating to student’s
visas and conditions for employment, while the Fair Work Ombudsman offers free advice and
education, including a range of in-language resources, to all employees and employers.
24
Collectively, these whole-of-government activities provide current and prospective students
with information about their protections and rights under the Education Services for Overseas
Students Framework, assist education providers and their contracted agents to understand
their responsibilities, and educate employers and industry on the benefits and processes
associated with engaging international students and graduates.
Greater cross-government collaboration will be developed and delivered in the context of the
International Education and Skills Strategic Framework, once finalised. Implementation will
include additional targeted communication strategies to better inform and educate providers
on their obligations, under both the National Code of Practice for Providers of Education and
Training to Overseas Students 2018 and 2025 Standards for RTOs, along with further efforts
to educate international students, education agents, and employers.
Recommendation 21
The Committee recommends the Government:
• better enforce the current rules prohibiting transfers within the first six months of
commencement of a student’s primary course
• if resources prohibit this from being enforced in all instances, at least take a risk-
based approach and enforce where there is evidence of patterns of transfers linked
to certain providers or agents
• consider adjustments to the student visa system so that visa risk follows the
student, shifting to the receiving providers when students transfer onshore to other
providers.
The Australian Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Government has removed the concurrent study functionality from the Provider
Registration and International Student Management System (PRISMS), in line with
Standard 7 of the National Code of Practice for Providers of Education and Training to
Overseas Students 2018 which restricts student transfers in the first 6 months of their primary
course of study.
The government announced its intention to introduce new legislation to ban agent
commissions for onshore transfers in October 2023 and remains committed to implementing
this measure. The ban seeks to disrupt unscrupulous agents from facilitating non-genuine
student transfers, including in the first 6 months of study.
The Department of Home Affairs will work with the Department of Education to identify and
inform policy changes and risk settings for students changing education providers.
Government will consider student wellbeing to ensure that students with legitimate reasons
for requesting a transfer within the first 6 months of study are not disadvantaged.
The Government will further consider regulatory enforcement in line with this
recommendation, including how non-compliance would be identified and enforced.
25
Recommendation 22
The Committee recommends the Government amend Education Services and Overseas
Students regulations to provide that any medical letter or certification for consideration of
early release can only be issued by a medical professional who is approved under the
students’ Overseas Student Health Cover.
The Australian Government agrees in-principle with this recommendation.
The Government will consider this recommendation in the context of work underway to
increase integrity in Australia’s international education sector.
Recommendation 23
The Committee recommends the Government tighten regulations to:
• require providers to record the details of all education agents or equivalent that
they receive students from into Provider Registration and International Student
Management System (PRISMS) Agents Dashboard
• require providers to have written agreements with all education agents or
equivalent
• require providers to actively monitor agent conduct including annually reviewed key
risk indicators
• enable mandatory requirements to report misconduct involving suspected
trafficking to the relevant regulatory authorities.
The Australian Government agrees in-principle with this recommendation.
The Government supports increasing the transparency of education agent data to providers.
The collection of information on education agent commissions will enable Government to
share more information with providers on the education agents they engage. These changes
are outlined in measures under the ELA Act passed by Parliament in November 2025,
supported by complementary changes to the Education Services for Overseas Students
Regulations 2019. The Government also supports increasing requirements for providers to
actively monitor education agents including requiring providers to have written agreements
with the agents from when they receive international students and will consider these
measures in more detail in consultation with the sector.
The Government notes the part of the recommendation to implement mandatory
requirements to report misconduct involving suspected trafficking and will consider this in
the context of the work underway, in line with its response to the Nixon Review and
commitments detailed in the Migration Strategy.
26
Recommendation 24
The Committee recommends the Government in consultation with the education sector
and agent peak bodies develop model clauses for providers to use in their written
agreements with education agents to improve integrity, consumer protection and enable
more transparency of payments.
The Australian Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Government will consider how implementation of the recommendation on model clauses
could align with its broader reform work on the Education Services for Overseas Students
Framework.
Recommendation 25
The Committee recommends the Government use whatever regulatory levers necessary to
mandate certain minimum requirements be included in all written agreements between
providers and students to increase transparency and consumer protection including:
• standard refund conditions
• mandatory disclosure of agent commissions and all other payments to the agent,
their employees or family, and all related entities (to avoid rorts and workaround
payments that are not characterised as ‘commissions’) that are charged to the
student.
The Australian Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of embedding transparency and consumer
protection in written agreements between providers and students.
The Government will work with the sector to consider requirements to be included.
Recommendation 26
The Committee recommends an expansion of the current Education Agents Dashboard on
Provider Registration and International Student Management System (PRISMS) to allow
provider access to all education agents' information. Such an expansion should enable
providers to consider an agent’s performance before entering contractual arrangements
and to be able to compare agent performance or integrity concerns about individual agents
across the sector.
The Australian Government agrees with this recommendation.
27
Improving providers’ access to education agent performance data will assist providers in
choosing quality education agents to support their student recruitment activities.
The Department of Education has already made enhancements to PRISMS that align with this
recommendation. In July 2024, the Department of Education expanded functions in PRISMS,
allowing education providers to search for any education agent and view information related
to the education agent, including the other education providers they work with as well as the
incompletion rates and visa refusal rates associated with that education agent.
As noted in the response to Recommendations 13 and 23, measures under the ELA Act give
providers greater access to the performance data of all education agents, not just those
agents with whom they have agreements. Improving providers’ access to education agent
performance data will assist providers in choosing quality education agents to support their
student recruitment activities.
Recommendation 27
The Committee recommends, in implementing the decision to ban the payment of
commissions by providers to education agents, migration agents or equivalent entities for
all onshore international student transfers, the Government ensure this captures
‘marketing’ or equivalent payments to related entities and persons however they are
characterised.
The Australian Government agrees with this recommendation.
As noted in recommendation 21, the Government is committed to implementing the ban on
agent commissions for onshore transfers and will ensure that all relevant persons, entities
and payment types are captured by the change.
The ELA Act includes a new definition of ‘education agent’ in the ESOS Act as well as
complementary changes to the Education Services for Overseas Students Regulations 2019.
These provide an activity-based approach to persons or entities considered to be education
agents, in order to capture persons or entities who may not have formal agreements or
relationships to providers.
Similarly, the new definition of ‘education agent commission’ includes both monetary and
non-monetary considerations or benefits given by a provider to an education agent or
associate in connection with the recruitment of overseas students or any other activity
involved in being an education agent under the new definition.
These changes ensure that, in implementing the banning of agent commission payments for
onshore transfers, all relevant persons, entities and payments are captured.
28
Recommendation 28
The Committee recommends the Government accept that regulation of education agents
is essential and long overdue, and that a model must be determined and implemented.
Government should consider the most effective way of ensuring scrutiny of education
agents given their key role in providing temporary migration advice and dealing with often
vulnerable consumers. Any model will need to ensure compliance with a single Code of
Ethical Practice for Education Agents setting expected standards for all education agents
who work with Australian education providers. Any scheme should be industry funded
through cost recovery mechanisms and have adequate resourcing for compliance and
enforcement.
The Australian Government agrees in-principle with this recommendation.
The Government is currently undertaking work to bring effect to this recommendation in line
with previous recommendations from the Nixon Review and the Migration Strategy, and may
consider further measures should this be required.
The Government recognises the importance of ensuring Australian immigration advice is
provided by lawful providers of immigration assistance.
Recommendation 29
The Committee recommends the Department of Education and the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations are each empowered to take a lead approach as
policy owners for International Education with respect to their relevant policy portfolios.
The Minister for Education and the Minister for Skills and Training, and relevant
departments, should ensure the ongoing coordination of policy development and
implementation. The Departments should also ensure that appropriate and holistic
measures are included in their annual performance statements.
The Australian Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Department of Education, the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations, and
other relevant agencies continue to build strong working relationships to coordinate policy
development and implementation with meetings at the working and executive level. The
departments also work closely with the sector to ensure providers comply with the
requirements of the ESOS Act.
The Council for International Education which includes as its members the Minister for
Education, the Minister for Trade and Tourism, the Minister for Skills and Training, the
Minister for Home Affairs and Minister for Immigration and Citizenship, the Assistant Minister
for International Education and the Assistant Minister for Foreign Affairs, provides the
framework to ensure whole-of- government strategic thinking, informed by input from the
Expert Members of the Council.
29
