Australian Government response to the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and
Financial Services report:
Wholesale investor and wholesale client tests
April 2026

Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the government consider establishing a mechanism for periodic
review of the operation of the wholesale investor and client tests; and that any such mechanism
include mandatory requirements for engagement and consultation with Australia's investment
industry.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
Whilst the Government does not intend to establish a dedicated mechanism for periodic review
of the operation of the wholesale investor and client tests, Treasury is continuing to monitor the
operation of the test and impacts on consumer outcomes.
The Government is progressing a wide range of reforms in response to the collapse of the Shield
and First Guardian Master Funds with a focus on strengthening consumer protections.
The Government is considering targeted reforms to ensure our regulatory system remains fit for
purpose and is consulting on these in 2026. On 10 February the Government released a
consultation paper on managed investment scheme regulation and governance. The Government
has also announced it will be consulting on additional consumer protection reforms in early 2026.
This includes stronger regulation of lead generation activities, creating a safer framework for
superannuation switching and strengthening superannuation trustee governance standards.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that subject to a period of stakeholder consultation, the
government amend the Corporations Act 2001 to remove the subjective elements of the
sophisticated investor test and introduce objective criteria relating to the knowledge and
experience of the investor.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government is prioritising its response to the collapse of Shield and First Guardian Master
Funds with a focus on strengthening consumer protections.
The Government is considering targeted reforms to ensure our regulatory system remains fit for
purpose and is consulting on these in 2026. On 10 February the Government released a
consultation paper on managed investment scheme regulation and governance. The Government
has also announced it will be consulting on additional consumer protection reforms in early 2026.
This includes stronger regulation of lead generation activities, creating a safer framework for
superannuation switching and strengthening superannuation trustee governance standards.
Response to the recommendations | 1
2 | Response to the recommendations
