Australian Government response to the
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee report:
Right Wing Extremist Movements in Australia
MARCH 2026
Introduction
The Government thanks the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References
Committee for its review into right wing extremist movements in Australia.
Australia’s security environment is degrading. On 5 August 2024, the National
Terrorism Threat Level was raised from POSSIBLE to PROBABLE – and the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation assesses there is a greater than
50 per cent chance of an onshore attack or attack planning in the next
12 months. More Australians are being radicalised, and radicalised quickly,
embracing an increasingly diverse range of extreme ideologies and willing to
use violence to advance their cause. This was demonstrated by the horrific
antisemitic terrorist attack at Bondi Beach on 14 December 2025. The
Government’s thoughts remain with the families and friends of the 15 people
who lost their lives. The alleged attempted bombing of a First Nations rally in
Perth on 26 January further highlights the threats facing Australians.
The Australian Government is committed to countering violent extremism in all
its forms. We have developed deep relationships with state and territory
partners, international partners, academia and industry to prevent and respond to
violent extremism and ensure a safer Australia. This commitment and the
importance of wide-ranging partnerships is reflected in A Safer Australia -
Australia’s Counter-Terrorism and Violent Extremism Strategy 2025, which
was released on 17 January 2025.
A key focus of the Government’s effort is building resilience within our
communities to guard against violent extremism and providing early support
services to those who are at risk. This requires our law enforcement and security
agencies to work hand in hand with health, social and community services.
Recommendations
Recommendation 1: The committee recommends that the Australian Government
undertake periodic evaluation of Australian de-radicalisation and countering violent
extremism programs. That evaluation should involve experts engaged in those
programs, law enforcement and intelligence agencies, and organisations that research
countering violent extremism and de-radicalisation. Any such periodic review should
draw upon the experience both in Australia and overseas in other liberal democracies.
Response: The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Australian Government has established a nationally coordinated expert evaluation
capability that will measure the effectiveness of countering violent extremism (CVE)
intervention programs delivered in all states and territories. This national evaluation is
underway and will ensure intervention programs are continually reviewed and refined, in
light of the changing environment, developments in research and internationally recognised
best practice.
Recommendation 2: The committee recommends that the Australian government
develops a national framework for engaging with young people to deter them from
radical extremism. That framework should provide best practice guidance to the states
and territories and the broader civic community on how to engage with young people
to:
• assist them in identifying harmful ideologies promoting violent extremism;
• deter them from adopting harmful ideologies promoting violent extremism; and
• provide them with the means to engage with the wider community in a socially
positive way
Response: The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
A Safer Australia - Australia’s Counter-Terrorism and Violent Extremism Strategy 2025 sets
out the Australian Government’s plans to engage young people, and youth experts, in its
efforts to address youth radicalisation. This takes a whole-of-sector approach, drawing
together education, social services, law enforcement and other key bodies across the country.
The Australian Government has established the Youth Advisory Council for A Safer
Australia (YACSA) to incorporate youth perspectives into policies and programs which aim
to disengage young people from violent extremism. The YACSA was appointed on 16 July
2025 and is made up of 15 young people aged 16-24. The YACSA will provide feedback on
materials, initiatives, and resources that support youth prevention efforts, ensuring they reach
and resonate with young people.
The YACSA will work closely with the Youth and Mental Health Advisory Group, an
existing group of youth experts in CVE, mental health and education, to provide advice to the
Government on how to improve policy responses to issues related to violent extremism. This
includes providing advice on the whole system, from identifying early signs and risk factors
to becoming radicalised to violence to providing support to a community after a violent
extremist event. The Youth and Mental Health Advisory Group will also continue to be a
community of practice by sharing case studies, assessing capabilities and gaps in programs,
consolidating evidence on best practice, and uplifting capabilities to engage with youth
clients and clients with mental health and neurodivergence.
Recommendation 3: The committee recommends that the Australian government
conducts research into violent extremism in the online environment, including on:
• social media platforms;
• gaming platforms; and
• gaming-adjacent platforms.
That research should examine how those platforms may be used by extremist actors to
spread propaganda and recruit members, particularly in relation to young people.
Response: The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Australian Government will continue reviewing existing research into violent extremism
in the online environment to identify any gaps and inform future research priorities.
The Australian Government’s commissioned research program includes analysis of violent
extremism networks and behaviours in the online environment, the impacts of artificial
intelligence amplified misinformation, and policy responses to youth vulnerabilities and
interventions.
Recommendation 4: The committee recommends that the Office of the eSafety
Commissioner engages with stakeholders in relation to the development of best practice
guidelines in relation to transparent and independent assurance measures to verify that
social media platforms are enforcing terms of service to exclude harmful extremist
content.
Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
Under the Online Safety Act and subordinate legislation and codes, there are a number of
expectations or obligations on social media services, as well as other services, to enforce their
terms of service, including in relation to harmful extremist content.
The Government’s Basic Online Safety Expectations establish expectations that providers of
certain services – including social media services – take reasonable steps to ensure that
end-users are able to use the service in a safe manner, minimise material that depicts
abhorrent violent conduct, ensure that penalties for breaches of their terms of use are
enforced against all accounts held by those end-users and ensure they have terms of use,
policies and procedures in relation to the safety of end-users as well as procedures for reports
and complaints. These are supported by mechanisms for the eSafety Commissioner (eSafety)
to require information from service providers to promote transparency and accountability,
with reports published on the eSafety website. eSafety published a transparency report
focusing on terrorism and violent extremism in March 2025.
The Online Safety Act also provides for the development of mandatory industry codes and
standards for illegal and restricted content. The Unlawful Materials codes and standards have
been developed and are in force. The codes and standards establish obligations relating to
Class 1A and Class 1B material (which includes pro-terror material and extreme crime and
violence material). The relevant codes and standards include requirements to enforce their
terms of service in relation to Class 1A and 1B material. The maximum civil penalty for not
complying with the codes and standards is $49.5 million. Certain social media services are
required to provide annual compliance reports to eSafety on their compliance with the code,
and eSafety has a range of other information-gathering and investigations powers across the
codes and standards to investigate potential non-compliance.
eSafety also routinely engages with stakeholders in relation to the development of good
practice guidance, particularly to promote the Safety-by-Design initiative. This initiative was
created based on extensive stakeholder consultation and provides industry with a set of
principles and guidance to incorporate, assess and enhance user safety. To support
implementation of the Safety-by-Design principles, eSafety developed assessment tools for
enterprise and start-up tech companies. The tools act as a safety ‘health check’ and learning
resources and include good practice examples.
Recommendation 5: The committee recommends the Australian government considers
introducing legislation that would enable Australian law enforcement and intelligence
agencies to access encrypted communications if there is a well-founded threat to
national security and a warrant has been issued by a judicial officer to access those
communications.
Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Telecommunications (Interception and Access) Act 1979 provides agencies with powers
to lawfully access communications in limited situations, under warrant and the
Telecommunications Act 1997 provides a framework for agencies to seek assistance from
industry.
The Australian Government continues to engage collaboratively with technology companies
to safeguard privacy, strengthen cybersecurity and protect users against technology-enabled
crime. The Government is committed to ensuring user and public safety while maintaining
privacy and cyber security—including through the use of strong encryption and other
innovative technology.
The Australian Government will also continue to work in partnership with technology
companies to maintain tightly controlled lawful access to communications, under warrant,
which is vital to the investigation and prosecution of serious crimes including terrorism, hate
crimes and other violent extremist offending, and protecting the safety of our citizens.
Recommendation 6: The committee recommends the Australian government adopts a
nationally consistent definition of what constitutes a hate crime and consider
establishing a national hate crimes database.
Response: The Australian Government agrees-in-principle to this recommendation.
On 23 December 2025, the Australian Government launched the first phase of the National
Hate Crimes and Incidents Database, which provides national information on individuals
charged with offences under hate crimes legislation in all Australian jurisdictions.
On 18 December 2025, the Australian Government published the ‘Eliminating Antisemitism’
response to the Special Envoy to Combat Antisemitism’s ‘Plan to Combat Antisemitism’ and
committed to providing states and territories resources to accelerate the development of the
National Hate Crimes and Incidents Database.
The Commonwealth is leading a working group with state and territory representatives to
accelerate the database. Through this work the Government will consider a nationally
consistent definition of what constitutes a hate crime.
The Combatting Antisemitism, Hate and Extremism (Criminal and Migration Laws) Act 2026
passed the Parliament on 20 January 2026. The Act established a new regime to list groups
that advocate for, or engage in, conduct constituting a hate crime, with offences for
individuals participating in certain activities with these prohibited hate groups. For the
purpose of this framework, ‘hate crime’ is defined in s 114A.3 of the Criminal Code to
include a specific set of Commonwealth, state and territory offences.
Greens additional recommendations
Recommendation 1: That responses to right wing extremism and white supremacy be
intersectional, explicitly anti-racist and shaped by targeted communities.
Response: The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Australian Government is committed to addressing ideologically motivated violent
extremism in a way that reflects the diversity of Australian communities and builds
community cohesion. This means including diverse perspectives in the development and
implementation of CVE programs and maintaining a community-centred approach to
addressing radicalisation to violent extremism.
Recommendation 2: That the Australian Government publicly commit to implementing
the recommendations of the Christchurch Call.
Response: The Australian Government notes the recommendation, as this has already
occurred.
The Australian Government joined the Christchurch Call to Action on 15 May 2019, the
same day it was founded by the Governments of France and New Zealand. Joining the Call
included public commitment to the 25 commitments of the Call, of which five pertain to
governments and 13 are collective commitments. The seven commitments for online service
providers are not for the Australian Government to implement.
Then, as now, the Australian Government remains committed to the Call’s aims to eliminate
terrorist and violent extremist content online and establishing a free, open and secure internet.
The Australian Government has taken action on all government commitments and collective
commitments. The Australian Government’s commitment to the Christchurch Call has
continued through its restructure to a non-governmental organisation in July 2024.
Recommendation 3: That anti-racism training be mandated for all MPs and their staff.
Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Parliamentary Workplace Support Service Act 2023 gives the Parliamentary Workplace
Support Service a function to provide education on, and to inform parliamentarians and their
staff about, matters relating to the employment of staff under the Members of Parliament
(Staff) Act 1984 and maintaining safe and respectful workplaces.
The Parliamentary Workplace Support Service Chief Executive Officer may, by legislative
instrument, determine a specified education or training program for parliamentarians and
their staff is mandatory where certain conditions set out in the legislation are met.
Recommendation 4: That guidelines are developed for media that are grounded in an
anti-racist approach to reporting and to minimise harm from sensationalist reporting.
Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
A balanced, robust and independent news media sector is critical to Australian society and
the operation of our democratic systems and institutions. Reflecting the importance of a free
media, our regulatory arrangements enable industry to take the lead in developing and
overseeing content standards that reflect community standards.
Australia’s print and online news media operates under a self-regulatory framework. Industry
bodies, such as the Australian Press Council (APC), are responsible for assessing complaints
regarding its members. Several media organisations have their own internal complaints
handling processes. The APC has developed Advisory Guidelines on particular issues. These
Advisory Guidelines provide additional information and resources on best practice reporting,
including in relation to the reporting of religion, ethnicity and race.
In addition, news content that is provided via broadcasting services in Australia is regulated
under a co-regulatory framework. This framework is premised on industry codes of practice
that are developed by relevant industry sectors and registered by the Australian
Communications and Media Authority under the Broadcasting Services Act 1992. These
codes of practice include procedures for dealing with complaints.
Recommendation 5: That the Australian Government commit to fully funding and
implementing the National Anti-Racism Framework.
Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Government believes that there is no place in Australia for racism or discrimination of
any kind.
The Government is taking a number of actions as part of its multifaceted approach to
addressing complex experiences of racism in the community, with initiatives already
underway across a range of portfolios that align with the National Anti-Racism Framework’s
recommendations. This includes appointing the Special Envoy to Combat Antisemitism and
Special Envoy to Combat Islamophobia. The Government has adopted the Special Envoy to
Combat Antisemitism’s Plan to Combat Antisemitism and will continue to work through the
implementation of the 13 recommendations in consultation with the Australian Jewish
community and the Special Envoy. The Government is also carefully considering the Special
Envoy to Combat Islamophobia’s report.
The Government has also passed legislation to strengthen offences for urging force or
violence against groups or members of groups and creating new offences for threatening
force or violence against groups or members of groups.
In response to the antisemitic terrorist attack at Bondi Beach, the Parliament passed the
Combatting Antisemitism, Hate and Extremism (Criminal and Migration Laws) Act 2026 on
20 January 2026. The Act increased penalties for hate crime offences, created aggravated
sentencing factors for hate-motivated conduct, and introduced new aggravated offences
targeting leaders who promote violence and adults who radicalise children. The Act also
established a new regime to list groups that advocate for, or engage in, conduct constituting a
hate crime, with offences for individuals participating in certain activities with these
prohibited hate groups. In addition, the Act included reforms to Australia’s migration laws to
improve community safety by enabling the Minister for Home Affairs to refuse to grant, or to
cancel a visa, on the basis of hate motivated conduct and offences relating to the spread of
hatred and extremism.
Recommendation 6: That the Australian Government establish a standalone anti-
racism portfolio.
Response: The Australian Government does not agree to this recommendation.
The Government believes that racism and discrimination are unacceptable. All parts of
Government have an important role in tackling racism to ensure that everyone can participate
in Australia’s democratic, social and economic life. The Government considers it important
that all public servants foster an understanding and appreciation of the human rights
implications of policy and service delivery across government.
Current approaches, where portfolios collaborate across government while developing their
own specific expertise, are intended to embed practices that ensure the equity and dignity of
all Australians are considered at all stages of decision-making.
Recommendation 7: That Parliament conduct a public inquiry to review standing
orders and any changes to their language and interpretation in order to eliminate racist,
exclusionary and discriminatory behaviour.
Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation as it is a matter for the
Parliament.
Recommendation 8: That technology companies be held accountable for the
proliferation of hate on their platforms through:
• a ban on the targeting, harvesting and selling of young people's data
• a Digital Duty of Care on tech platforms
• limiting the toxicity of algorithms and extreme content
• stopping the monetisation and profit from hate
Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Government has committed to amend the Online Safety Act 2021 to introduce a statutory
duty of care on digital platforms, placing the onus on them to better prevent online harms.
Moving towards broader systems-based regulation that ensures digital platforms take
responsibility for minimising harm on their services is a key recommendation of the
independent statutory review of the Online Safety Act undertaken in 2024 by
Ms Delia Rickard PSM.
The review of the Online Safety Act recommended that, under a duty of care, digital
platforms be required to take reasonable steps to prevent foreseeable harms on their platforms
and services, including the proliferation of hate. These requirements to prevent foreseeable
harms would extend to digital platforms’ systems and processes, including the algorithms for
social media services that determine which content is displayed and how it is displayed. It is
also recommended that such requirements be underpinned by risk assessment and risk
mitigation, and informed by safety-by-design principles.
In addition, the Government has committed to updating the Privacy Act 1988 (Cth) for the
digital age. The Privacy and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2024 included a requirement
for the Information Commissioner to develop a Children’s Online Privacy Code, and work is
underway towards a second tranche of reform. While the second tranche of reform is yet to
be finalised, relevant measures may include a proposal from the Privacy Act Review to
prohibit entities from targeting and direct marketing to children (unless it is in the best
interests of the child) and prohibit entities from trading in the personal information of
children.
Recommendation 9: That developing strategies to make social media safer for young
people must genuinely engage and involve young people themselves.
Response: The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
Engagement with young people who use social media is essential to developing strategies
which are practical and effective, and the Government is committed to providing young
people with the opportunity to inform regulations and policies that affect them.
Notably, the Online Safety Amendment (Social Media Minimum Age) Act2024 passed
Parliament on 29 November 2024. It introduces a minimum age of 16 years to have an
account on age-restricted social media platforms, protecting young Australians at a critical
stage of their development. The Government consulted widely with young people, parents
and carers, experts and community groups and used these insights to inform the legislation.
Consultation included three roundtables dedicated to directly engaging young people and
seeking their input and feedback on the issue of a social media minimum age.
In addition, the eSafety Commissioner administers the eSafety Youth Council (the Council).
The Council gives young people, aged 13 to 24 years, an avenue to influence issues that
matter most to them, by engaging in meaningful discussion and sharing their knowledge and
experiences of online safety with eSafety. The Council was established in 2022 and offers an
opportunity to share insights for policy and program design on online safety issues now and
into the future. The Council is made up of young people who have a range of lived
experiences, come from various places across Australia and represent different gender
identities and cultures. eSafety seeks new members for the Council every two years.
As mentioned above, the Privacy and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2024 legislates a
requirement for the Information Commissioner to develop and register a Children’s Online
Privacy Code that would apply to social media and other internet services likely to be
accessed by children. The Information Commissioner is developing the Code and has already
undertaken extensive consultation with a range of stakeholders, including children, young
people, parents, child development experts, child welfare advocates, industry and the eSafety
Commissioner.
These measures align with key national strategies such as Safe and Supported: the National
Framework for Protecting Australia’s Children 2021-2023, which emphasises embedding the
voices and lived experience of children in program and policy design.
In addition, the Combatting Antisemitism, Hate and Extremism (Criminal and Migration
Laws) Act 2026 created a new aggravated offence for adults who radicalise children.
Imposing higher penalties on those who target children reflects the gravity of this conduct
and sends a clear message that targeting children for violent extremism attracts serious
criminal penalties.
