 
  

         

                                                              

               Australian Government response to the                   Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee report on Allegations concerning the inappropriate exercise of ministerial powers, with respect to the visa status of au pairs, and related matters   

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

      

            

      

          March 2026   

           

                   Introduction   

             The          Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee          concluded its inquiry into          Allegations concerning the inappropriate exercise of ministerial powers, with respect to the visa status of au pairs, and related matters          when it tabled its report on          19 September 2018         . The then Morrison government did not provide a response within the mandated timeframe.   

         

                   

         

     

                  Government Response to Committee Recommendations   

                          

                No.         

                Recommendation         

                Government Response          


                   

                That the Government strengthen the minister's tabling statements to Parliament on ministerial interventions, by requiring the minister's statements to declare   
        whether or not  
         each ministerial intervention was made in accordance with the Ministerial Guidelines.        

                The Government notes this recommendation. However, given the passage of time since this report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.          


                   

                The committee recommends that the Senate consider censuring the Minister for Home Affairs (the Hon Peter Dutton MP) for the actions examined in this report, when he was the Minister for Immigration and Border Protection, for failing to observe fairness in making official decisions as required by the Statement of Ministerial Standards.        

                The Government notes this recommendation. However, given the passage of time since this report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.          


                   

                   That the Minister representing the Minister for Home Affairs provide, within three sitting days, an explanation to the Senate responding to the matters raised in this report.        

                The Government notes this recommendation. However, given the passage of time since this report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.      

         

          

     