OFFICIAL
Australian Government response to the
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs
Legislation Committee report:
Public Interest Disclosure Amendment (Review) Bill 2022
APRIL 2026
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
The Australian Government thanks the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation
Committee for its report into the Public Interest Disclosure Amendment (Review) Bill 2022
[Provisions] (the Bill) tabled on 14 March 2023.
The Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013 (PID Act) aims to promote the integrity and
accountability of the Commonwealth public sector by providing a framework for public
officials to disclose suspected wrongdoing by another public official or Australian
government agency, and for those disclosures to be properly investigated and dealt with. The
framework provides immunity from civil, criminal and administrative liability and protection
from reprisal action for public officials who make, or provide assistance in relation to, a
disclosure in accordance with the requirements in the PID Act.
Public sector whistleblowing reform
The Australian Government is committed to delivering strong, effective and accessible
protections for public sector whistleblowers through staged reform of the PID Act.
In 2023, the Government delivered stage 1 priority reforms to the PID Act through the
Public Interest Disclosure Amendment (Review) Act 2023. This Act was passed by both
Houses of Parliament on 15 June 2023 and commenced on 1 July 2023 ensuring immediate
improvements to the Commonwealth public sector whistleblowing framework were in place
for commencement of the National Anti-Corruption Commission.
Stage 1 reforms strengthened protections for disclosers and witnesses; focused the framework
on integrity-related wrongdoing; made the framework easier to administer; and enhanced
oversight of the framework by the Commonwealth Ombudsman and the Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security (IGIS). These reforms implemented 21 of the 33 recommendations
of the 2016 Review of the PID Act by Mr Phillip Moss AM (Moss Review) and
recommendations from other parliamentary committee reports.
In November 2023, the Government released a consultation paper for public consultation on a
second stage of reforms to address the underlying complexity of the PID Act and ensure that
the framework remains accessible and fit for purpose, including proposals to establish an
independent whistleblower protection body.
In September 2025, the Government conducted public consultation on an exposure draft
Public Interest Disclosure and Other Legislation Amendment (Whistleblower Protections)
Bill to improve the accessibility, operation and administration of the PID Act. The Bill would
significantly redraft the PID Act and amend the Ombudsman Act 1976 and other legislation
to:
• establish a Whistleblower Ombudsman within the Office of the Commonwealth
Ombudsman
• clarify and strengthen protections and supports for public officials who act within the
PID framework, and
• improve the operation of the PID Act by ensuring that rights, obligations and
procedures are clear and accessible.
The exposure draft Bill was informed by recommendations received from relevant
parliamentary inquiries, the Moss Review, the outcomes of public consultation undertaken in
2023 and close engagement with the offices of the Commonwealth Ombudsman, the IGIS
and other Commonwealth agencies.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Review of the Tax and Corporate whistleblowing framework
The Treasury is currently conducting a statutory review into Australia’s tax and corporate
whistleblowing frameworks. The review will investigate whether the current laws are
working as intended, identify any ongoing concerns, and where appropriate make
recommendations for further improvement.
The tax and corporate whistleblowing frameworks provide protection to whistleblowers who
come forward with information about misconduct or wrongdoing in the tax, corporate and
financial sectors in Australia.
The review follows amendments in 2019 which established a new tax whistleblowing regime
in the Taxation Administration Act 1953 and strengthened corporate and financial services
sector whistleblowing regimes in the Corporations Act 2001.
The Treasury is planning to undertake consultation as part of its review.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation Government response
Committee Report
1 That the explanatory memorandum for the Public Interest The Government agrees with this recommendation.
Disclosure Amendment (Review) Bill 2022 be amended
In June 2023, the Government prepared a replacement explanatory memorandum to the
to further clarify the application of the ‘personal work-
Public Interest Disclosure Amendment (Review) Bill 2022 which included amendments
related conduct’ provisions
to address this recommendation.
2 That the explanatory memorandum for the Public Interest The Government agrees with this recommendation.
Disclosure Amendment (Review) Bill 2022 be amended
In June 2023, the Government prepared a replacement explanatory memorandum to the
to clarify the limited role of the Office of the
Public Interest Disclosure Amendment (Review) Bill 2022 which included amendments
Commonwealth Ombudsman with respect to PID
to address this recommendation.
disclosure reports and investigations
3 That the Bill be passed The Government notes this recommendation.
This recommendation is a matter for the Senate, noting the Public Interest Disclosure
Amendment (Review) Bill 2022 was passed by both Houses of Parliament on 15 June
2023 and came into force on 1 July 2023.
Additional recommendations – Additional comments by Senator Paul Scarr
3 The Bill be amended to specifically provide that persons The Government notes this recommendation.
referring disclosable conduct may provide information to
This recommendation is being considered in the context of implementation of the stage 2
health professionals providing support consistent with the
reforms to the PID Act.
National Anti-Corruption Commission Act 2022.
4 That the drafting of the Bill be refined to make it clearer The Government notes this recommendation.
that the intention is that the exclusion only applies to
On 15 June 2023, the Government passed parliamentary amendments to the
conduct solely related to personal employment-related
Public Interest Disclosure Amendment (Review) Bill 2022 to clarify that where a
grievances. Further consideration should be given to
disclosure contains both personal work-related conduct and instances of disclosable
using the words: “solely” or “only” in the drafting.
conduct, the instances of disclosable conduct remain subject to the
Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013 (PID Act). These amendments were incorporated
into the Bill that was passed by both Houses of Parliament.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
5 The Government prepare and release a consultation paper The Government notes this recommendation.
proposing an independent Whistleblower Protection
This recommendation is being considered in the context of implementation of stage 2
Authority which provides guidance, support and
reforms to the PID Act.
protection for whistleblowers in both the private and
public sectors. In late 2023, the Government conducted public consultation on a second stage of reforms
to the PID Act, including proposals to establish an independent whistleblower protection
body. In September 2025, the Government conducted public consultation on an exposure
draft of the Public Interest Disclosure and Other Legislation Amendment (Whistleblower
Protections) Bill which would establish a Whistleblower Ombudsman within the Office
of the Commonwealth Ombudsman to provide robust, effective and independent
oversight of the PID Act to ensure disclosures are being handled appropriately and
whistleblowers are receiving appropriate protections.
As part of the statutory review into the tax and corporate sector whistleblowing
frameworks contained in the Taxation Administration Act 1953 and the Corporations Act
2001, Treasury will consider whether current assistance, guidance and protections
available to tax and corporate whistleblowers are adequate and whether existing support
mechanisms are effective.
6 The Government carefully consider other suggestions for The Government notes this recommendation.
reform made by stakeholders in this inquiry as part of this
This recommendation is being considered in the context of implementation of stage 2
Bill or subsequent stages of whistleblower law reform. In
reforms to the PID Act.
particular, the Government pursue as a matter of
importance the issue of potential publication of a list of
lawyers with security clearance who may be accessed by
potential disclosers.
OFFICIAL
