Australian Government response to the
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Employment,
Education and Training report:
Study Buddy or Influencer: Inquiry into the Use of Generative Artificial
Intelligence in the Australian Education System
TABLING APRIL 2026
1
Overview
The Australian Government (the Government) thanks the House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Employment, Education and Training (the Committee) for its work
on the inquiry into the use of Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) in the Australian
education system.
The Government welcomes the opportunity to respond to the inquiry and acknowledges
and thanks those who have contributed.
GenAI has the potential to deliver significant benefits to teaching and learning. It can help
personalise education and make learning more compelling and effective. However, it also
brings new challenges, including for the privacy and safety of students.
The Government is committed to supporting teachers and school communities to maximise
the potential benefits of this new technology, while also mitigating the risks. This is a
national education priority.
The Government is focussed on capturing the opportunity of GenAI, spreading its benefits,
and keeping Australians safe. On 2 December 2025, the Government released the National
AI Plan (the Plan), setting out the Government’s ambition to position Australia as a leader in
responsible, inclusive and innovative Artificial Intelligence (AI) development and adoption,
including in the education sector. The Plan has Australians at its centre, with the aim that
everyone in Australia benefits from the opportunities of AI, across all regions, industries and
communities.
The Government acknowledges that work is ongoing across all education sectors to address
the rapid pace of developments in GenAI and to manage its safe, ethical and effective use.
The Government will continue to work in partnership with states and territories to ensure
guidance supports the appropriate use of GenAI, while maintaining the quality of education
outcomes.
The response to the Committee’s recommendations has been coordinated by the
Department of Education, in consultation with the following agencies:
• Department of Industry, Science and Resources (DISR)
• Department of Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR)
• Attorney-General’s Department (AGD)
• eSafety Commissioner
• Australian Research Council (ARC)
• Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Agency (TEQSA)
• Education Services Australia (ESA)
• Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority (ACARA)
• Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership (AITSL)
• Australian Education Research Organisation (AERO)
In responding to the Committee’s recommendations, the Government has been cognisant of
respective roles and responsibilities. The Australian Government provides strategic direction
and national leadership of Australia’s school education system, in collaboration with states
2
and territories and the non-government sector. The delivery of school education, including
decisions on specific programs or technologies, is the responsibility of state and territory
governments and non-government education authorities.
The response has 4 parts:
• Part 1 responds to Recommendation 2 of the Committee’s report which calls for all
Australian schools to be funded to 100 per cent of the Schooling Resource Standard. The
Government supports this recommendation.
• Parts 2, 3, and 4 respond to Recommendations 1 and 3-25. The Government notes these
recommendations.
3
Part 1: Better and Fairer Schools Agreements
Australia is creating a better and fairer education system for all students
Relevant recommendation 2
The Australian Government has reached agreement with every state and territory
government to get all public schools on a path to 100 per cent of the Schooling Resource
Standard (SRS) through the Better and Fairer Schools Agreement 2025-2034 and the Better
and Fairer Schools Agreement 2025-2034 – Full and Fair Funding (collectively known as the
BFSA).
Under these agreements, the Australian Government will provide an estimated $16.5 billion
in additional Commonwealth funding to government schools nationally over the next
10 financial years from 2025-26 to 2034-35 — lifting the Commonwealth’s share of the SRS
for public schools to 25 per cent by 2034 in every state and the ACT, and to 40 per cent in
the Northern Territory. More than $16.5 billion over 10 financial years is tied to real,
practical reforms, and represents the biggest ever new investment in public schools by an
Australian Government.
The Australian Government’s significant investment through the BFSA can provide students
and teachers greater opportunity to harness the potential of digital technologies, including
GenAI.
Reforms are focused on three priority areas: equity and excellence, wellbeing for learning
and engagement, and a strong and sustainable workforce. These reform areas have been
designed to ensure that all students can access a quality education and provide the support
to help all students finish school and reach their educational potential.
Reform initiatives will support more individualised learning and promote greater uptake of
high-quality science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) education
opportunities, along with increased teacher attraction and retention, and strengthened
teacher and school leader wellbeing.
4
Part 2: Schools and early childhood education
The Australian Government is adopting a leadership and coordination role
Relevant recommendations 1, 3, 4, 7, 8, 10, 12, 13, 15, 17, 18, 19, 20
The Australian Government is providing national leadership and guidance on the use of
AI in schools
The Government is collaborating with the states and territories and monitoring progress on
GenAI pilots in schools through the National AI in Schools Taskforce (AI Taskforce) and other
forums. The AI Taskforce was established by Education Ministers in 2023 and comprises
representatives from all jurisdictions, school sectors, and national education bodies,
including:
• Education Services Australia (ESA);
• the Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority (ACARA);
• the Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership (AITSL);
• the Australian Education Research Organisation (AERO); and
• the eSafety Commissioner.
The AI Taskforce’s work provides nationally consistent guidance for schools and teachers on
the use of AI. This work includes resources for whole school planning for AI by assisting
schools and teachers to identify interrelationships across the dimensions of the Australian
Curriculum. It also includes curriculum content elaborations that provide teachers with
examples and illustrations to support them in their delivery of AI-related content to
students.
The Australian Government is engaging to leverage international insights
The Government is engaging internationally to support safe and responsible AI innovation
and to promote safe, secure, inclusive and trustworthy adoption of AI. The Government
supports responsible AI innovation by delivering on international commitments and working
closely with partners to shape global AI norms and standards and international governance
frameworks to reflect Australia’s values and interests.
Australia is establishing an AI Safety Institute (the Safety Institute). The Safety
Institute will monitor, test and share information on AI, ensuring Australia’s laws keep pace
with AI developments to protect people and businesses. The Safety Institute
will be established in early 2026. The Safety Institute will work with the International
Network for Advanced AI Measurement, Evaluation and Science to leverage world-class
safety testing expertise from leading AI nations.
Australia has signed the India AI Impact Summit Declaration, the Paris AI Action Summit
Statement, the Bletchley Declaration, and the Seoul Declaration for Safe, Innovative and
Inclusive AI, and is a member of the Hiroshima AI Process Friends Group and
the International Network for Advanced AI Measurement, Evaluation and Science. The
Government also participates in international forums and summits through the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the United Nations (UN),
the G20 and the OECD’s Global Partnership on AI.
5
The Government takes a multi-stakeholder approach to international engagement, working
closely with industry and civil society, as well as other governments, to ensure Australia
captures the opportunity of AI, spreads the benefits widely and keeps Australians safe. To
support this, the Government is developing a Strategy for International Engagement and
Regional Leadership on AI to align Australia’s foreign and domestic AI policy settings.
The Australian Government is engaging with states and territories to ensure
schools and early childhood education systems are supported
Relevant recommendations 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21
The Australian Government is supporting nationally consistent guidance on the use of AI
in schools
All Australian Education Ministers agree that responding to the risks and harnessing the
opportunities for Australian schools and students arising from GenAI technologies is a
national education priority.
Recognising the rapidly evolving technology landscape, in February 2023, Education
Ministers agreed to develop an evidence-based, best-practice framework to guide schools in
harnessing AI tools to support teaching and learning.
The Australian Framework for Generative Artificial Intelligence in Schools (the Framework)
was jointly developed by states and territories and non-government representative bodies
through the AI Taskforce and released for implementation by states and territories on
1 December 2023.
The Framework provides nationally consistent guidance to schools and their communities
on the use of GenAI. It seeks to guide the responsible and ethical use of GenAI tools in ways
that benefit students, schools, and society.
Education Ministers have committed to regularly reviewing the Framework to
accommodate the fast-moving pace of technological development in GenAI. The 2024
Framework Review found that the Framework not only correctly identified and made
provision for existing challenges but also effectively predicted emerging and current risks,
such as the increased use of AI deep fakes, highlighting its relevance and foresight in
addressing contemporary challenges.
As part of the Framework’s implementation, Education Ministers provided $1.8 million to
ESA to establish product expectations for GenAI technology in partnership with AERO. These
product expectations have been developed across three workstreams: privacy and
information security; human rights and wellbeing; and education impact.
The privacy and information security stream extends the guidance provided to schools
about software security and privacy controls through ESA’s Safer Technology 4 Schools
(ST4S) initiative. This extension to ST4S covers aspects specific to AI and, importantly, it also
establishes a technical assessment framework and product development guidance for
education software vendors and developers. As part of the ST4S assessment process, ESA
released the new assessment module on AI security, privacy and online safety in 2024.
6
Software suppliers and vendors can use the self-assessment tool to understand their level of
AI risk before submitting their product for evaluation.
To advance the human rights and wellbeing workstream, ESA has developed a Responsible
AI standard to assess ethical and human rights dimensions of education
technology. Importantly, this standard draws from established and emerging national and
international standards and approaches including Australia’s Guidance for AI Adoption,
the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) AI Risk
assessment, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) AI Risk Management
Framework, and ISO 42001. It is informed by work with states and territories through a
national working group, convened by ESA. The standard is undergoing pilot testing with a
select number of software vendors and Indigenous Data Sovereignty considerations are
being incorporated.
To advance the education impact workstream, ESA has undertaken work, in partnership
with AERO, to determine how to measure the educational effectiveness of AI-enabled
education technology. This work seeks to assess and provide guidance to the education
software industry on the educational effectiveness of software and tools and importantly to
enable educators to select software with confidence.
The Australian Government is investing in GenAI pilots in schools across the country
The Government is providing funding to support multiple pilots involving GenAI under the
Workload Reduction Fund (WRF), part of the National Teacher Workforce Action Plan. This
complements work by states and territories to trial GenAI through a range of initiatives,
such as the New South Wales (NSW) Department of Education’s NSWEduChat and the South
Australian (SA) Department for Education’s EdChat. WRF pilots involving GenAI include:
• Australian Government support of $2.3 million for a Western Australian (WA) cross-
sectoral GenAI pilot. The Australian Government’s contribution has been matched by
WA, including an in-kind contribution from the Association of Independent Schools WA
and Catholic Education WA.
• Support for three pilots involving GenAI in NSW, with matched funding to be provided
by NSW, these include:
o $1.5 million in Australian Government funding to support a NSW Government
pilot to expand the NSWEduChat trial to enable access for all government school
staff. The pilot aims to increase understanding of the impact of NSWEduChat on
teacher workload reduction and opportunities to use AI to assist teachers.
o $0.7 million in Australian Government funding to support ‘Cechat – A Generative
AI in Schools’ pilot, led by Catholic Schools NSW. The AI-powered chatbot will be
trialled in select Catholic sector schools to reduce teacher workloads by
automating routine tasks and supporting educational leadership.
o $0.5 million in Australian Government funding to support the ‘Reducing Teacher
Workload: Assessment, Marking and Feedback’ pilot, which will be implemented
by the Association of Independent Schools of NSW and is expected to
incorporate the use of generative AI tools.
7
The Australian Government is supporting investment in resources and research for
teaching and learning
Australian governments are enhancing digital and AI literacy through the Australian
Curriculum. The Australian Curriculum (Version 9.0) was approved by all Education Ministers
on 1 April 2022 and is being implemented progressively across Australia from Foundation to
Year 10. It includes guidance on what digital knowledge and skills should be taught in
schools.
To support teachers to implement AI-related content across all curriculum learning areas,
ACARA published new elaborations in Mathematics and Digital Technologies along with its
AI Curriculum Connection resource in 2023, accessible on the ACARA website. This resource
helps teachers develop their students’ understanding of how AI works and the elements
that comprise it, and how to use it responsibly and ethically.
The Government is also providing teachers with a wide range of resources to build students’
digital literacy and understanding of digital technologies, including GenAI and its limitations,
through its Digital Technologies Hub (DT Hub). The DT Hub is delivered by ESA and provides
an extensive array of freely available, quality-assured resources to support teachers to
deliver the Australian Curriculum: Digital Technologies and the Digital Literacy general
capability in schools across Australia.
The resources provided through the DT Hub are complemented by several other
government-backed initiatives to support teaching and learning on the use of GenAI tools
including:
• a two-part resource, provided by AITSL as part of its ‘Spotlight’ series, evaluating the
evidence for educational technology, including GenAI models, and how these
technologies can be leveraged to support teachers, enhance their teaching capabilities,
and enable learning in schools;
• research undertaken by AERO, as part of its 2024 Research Agenda, exploring the most
effective ways to deploy edtech, including GenAI, to reverse growing inequity in child
and student learning outcomes;
• free training programs targeted at educators, provided by the eSafety Commissioner,
acknowledging the positive and negative applications of AI and safety issues to look out
for; and
• funding support for Charles Sturt University to deliver microcredential courses on
practical application of AI for teachers.
The Government recognises the importance of students having the skills and knowledge to
prepare for further education and the workforce. Action 5 of the National AI Plan, ‘Support
and train Australians’, aims to boost digital skills, expand training access, and grow an
inclusive pipeline of AI-ready workers through industry, and the skills and education sectors.
This builds on existing government initiatives to support AI literacy, education and skills,
such as the Next Generation Graduates Program, the National Skills Agreement and the
Future Skills Organisation’s ‘FSO Skills Accelerator – AI’.
8
The Australian Government is providing support for early childhood education and care
Best practice around the introduction and safe use of GenAI is still being developed in the
early childhood education and care (ECEC) sector. Guidance for ECEC services is available on
the Australian Children’s Education and Care Quality Authority (ACECQA) website as part of
the National Quality Framework (NQF) Online Safety Guide.
Given the sensitive nature of information in ECEC settings, robust cybersecurity measures,
guidance for the ethical use of AI, and parental/carer involvement, are essential for ensuring
approved providers and educators can provide a safe digital environment.
Working collaboratively with the states and territories will be equally critical. Regulatory
authorities in each state and territory administer the NQF to ensure compliance and
continuous improvement including in relation to online environments.
9
Part 3: Higher education and research
The Australian Government is working proactively with the higher
education and VET sectors to promote ethical and effective engagement
with GenAI
Relevant recommendations 6, 8, 16, 21, 22, 23
The Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Agency (TEQSA) — Australia’s national
regulator of higher education — has been working proactively with experts from Australian
higher education providers to support institutions to understand and address the impact of
GenAI on teaching, learning, assessment and research. Resources are available for
universities and higher education providers via the TEQSA AI Good Practice Hub.
TEQSA is also playing an important role in supporting the higher education sector to meet
the challenges and risks as well as opportunities afforded by GenAI. It has developed
resources, and placed these on its GenAI knowledge hub webpage to help ensure the sector
maintains compliance with the Higher Education Standards Framework (Threshold
Standards) 2021. The Threshold Standards set out the requirements providers must meet to
be registered, and remain registered, to deliver higher education in Australia.
In the vocational education and training (VET) sector, the Government has been working to
strengthen the skills and training system to ensure VET is high quality, relevant and
responsive, and has an embedded cycle of continuous improvement that responds to and
supports emerging technologies such as AI.
The 10 Jobs and Skills Councils (JSCs) develop and provide evidence-based guidance and find
solutions to workforce issues affecting their industry sector. Future Skills Organisation (FSO)
is undertaking research to better understand the impacts of GenAI on the finance,
technology and business workforces.
In response to the VET Workforce Blueprint, released in October 2024, the JSCs are
undertaking actions to grow and support the VET teacher, trainer and assessor workforce,
including developing emerging skills related to digital capability and AI, and identifying
methods for supporting the VET workforce.
Initiatives in this sector are underway to boost digital skills, expand training access, and
grow an inclusive pipeline of AI-ready workers. These include:
• ‘FSO Skills Accelerator – AI’, which brings together the VET sector and industry to
connect, collaborate, and share best practices. This program expands access to AI skills
for VET learners, educators, and administrators. It aims to mobilise the VET system to
upskill teachers and trainers, provide training to learners, and collaborate with training
providers. The long-term goal is to ensure a sustainable approach to AI skills
development across the national skills and training system.
• The National Skills Agreement (NSA) is ensuring the national vocational education and
training (VET) sector provides high-quality, responsive and accessible education and
training. The NSA will boost productivity, deliver national priorities and support
Australians to obtain the skills and capabilities they need to prosper. Ensuring Australia’s
digital and technological capability remains an agreed national priority under the NSA,
10
with a new focus area for 2025-26 on maximising the benefits of AI adoption by
strengthening VET capacity to support workforce upskilling.
The Australian Government recognises the importance of research and
development for realising the potential of GenAI in education
Relevant recommendations 24 and 25
The Government recognises the growing accessibility and sophistication of GenAI, and the
importance of research and development for realising the potential of high-quality and safe
GenAI in education.
The Government already makes available a range of research and innovation funding,
including through the Australian Research Council (ARC), that can support research and
development on the potential application of the use of GenAI in education. This includes
through the ARC’s National Competitive Grants Program (NCGP).
The Government is also investing $1.6 billion through Australia’s Economic Accelerator
(AEA) to transform Australia’s research translation and commercialisation landscape. AEA
grants support the Government identified priority areas for the economy (outlined in the
National Reconstruction Fund Corporation (Priority Areas) Declaration 2023). Within these
priorities, grants also prioritise projects that align with one or more of 8 focus areas,
including AI.
11
Part 4: Whole of economy approach to GenAI
The Australian Government is focussed on capturing the opportunity of AI,
spreading the benefits, and keeping Australians safe
Relevant recommendations 1, 8, 9, 11, 13, 14
The Australian Government is focused on harnessing the opportunity of AI so all Australians
can benefit.
On 2 December 2025 the Australian Government released the National AI Plan (the Plan),
setting out the Government’s ambition to position Australia as a leader in responsible,
inclusive and innovative AI development and adoption. The Plan has Australians at its
centre, with the aim that everyone in Australia benefits from the AI opportunity, across all
regions, industries and communities.
The Plan is governed by three goals, with each supported by three respective pillars of
action:
• Capture the opportunity: by building smart infrastructure, backing domestic AI
capability and attracting global investment.
• Spread the benefits: through widespread AI adoption, supporting and training
Australian workers, and improved public services.
• Keep Australians safe: with legislative and regulatory frameworks that mitigate AI
harms, widespread responsible practices and international engagement that promotes
Australia’s values.
The Plan recognises the important role of the education sector in equipping Australian
students and school leavers with the necessary AI literacy, skills and experience to thrive in
AI-enabled workplaces. Action 5 of the Plan, ‘Support and train Australians’, aims to boost
digital skills, expand training access, and grow an inclusive pipeline of AI-ready workers
through industry, and the skills and education sectors.
The Plan also aims to capture the opportunities that AI presents in the education sector,
including in reducing teacher workloads and improving student outcomes. Action 6 of the
Plan, ‘Improve public services’, is focussed on harnessing AI to make delivery of public
services, such as education and healthcare, more effective, efficient, accessible and
responsive to the needs of Australians.
The Plan acknowledges that AI also presents novel risks and harms, including for Australian
students, and one of the three goals of the Plan is to keep Australians safe. The Government
is leveraging Australia’s robust existing legal and regulatory frameworks to take proactive
and targeted action to address AI harms as they arise. To support this approach, the
Government is establishing the Safety Institute. The Safety Institute will monitor, test and
share information on emerging AI capabilities, risks and harms. Its insights will support
ministers, portfolio agencies and regulators to maintain safety measures, laws and
regulatory frameworks that keep pace with rapid technological change.
The Australian Government is a world leader on online safety and is continuing to deliver
reforms that prevent online harm, especially for young Australians.
This includes:
12
• Announcing a digital duty of care, which will put the onus on services to take
responsibility for online harms, including from Al.
• Investing in digital literacy and online safety education, with a commitment of $6.45
million from 20256 onwards. This includes:
o $450,000 to SmackTalk to expand their program to better protect young
Australians from online sextortion. It will broaden their reach and develop free
resources and education on risks, warning signs, and safety strategies for young
Australians, parents, and community members. Funding will also support
ongoing learning and strengthen collaboration with eSafety, law enforcement
agencies, schools, and community groups.
o A further $6 million to the Alannah and Madeline Foundation (AMF) for
continued delivery of its 'Safe Kids are eSmart kids' digital and media literacy
education program in Australian schools from 2026-2029. This commitment
builds on an initial $6 million committed by the government to from 2023-2026
to the AMF to provide schools with free tools to teach kids to be safe, smart and
responsible in the digital world.
• Working to reduce and restrict access to 'nudify' apps and undetectable stalking apps,
which are mostly weaponised against Australian girls and women.
• Developing Australia's first National Media Literacy Strategy. The National Strategy will
establish the key skills and competencies Australians need to navigate the challenges
and opportunities presented by the digital world.
In relation to this, the Commonwealth Online Safety Act 2021 provides the eSafety
Commissioner with a range of powers to require the removal of unlawful and harmful
material, whether generated by AI or not. It also provides for industry codes and
standards requiring systemic safety measures from a wide range of online services,
including GenAI services and those with GenAI features. Codes and standards in relation to
unlawful and seriously harmful material are already in force, and eSafety has taken
enforcement action against a number of services.
In November 2025, eSafety announced that the provider of three of the most widely
visited GenAI ‘nudify’ services had withdrawn access from Australia, after receiving a formal
warning from eSafety as a result of its use to generate child sexual exploitation material of
Australian schoolchildren. A second phase of Codes focussed on age-restricted material
currently was registered by the eSafety Commissioner in 2025 and will come into
force between December 2025 and March 2026.
eSafety also has powers to require information from industry about the measures they have
in place to ensure the safety of their services, including GenAI features. This information is
published to promote transparency and accountability and incentivise safety uplift. Recent
findings from notices to companies like Meta, Google and Snapchat are available on
the eSafety website.
13
The Australian Government is implementing measures to protect privacy
Relevant recommendations 12, 14
The Government is committed to prioritising the safety and wellbeing of students and
educators using edtech and GenAI technology in education settings and recognises that
robust data protection is critical to this.
Also referenced in Part 2, The Australian Framework for Generative Artificial Intelligence in
Schools embeds ‘privacy, security and safety’ as one of its six principles in order that
‘students and others using generative AI products have their privacy and data protected’.
Existing data protection frameworks are key in upholding students’ privacy. The
Commonwealth Privacy Act 1988 (Privacy Act) is Australia’s main legislative framework that
regulates the collection, use, disclosure and retention of personal information by
Commonwealth public sector agencies, organisations with an annual turnover of more than
$3 million and some smaller entities. Many public educational institutions are covered by
state or territory privacy frameworks, with some states and territories also having a privacy
policy or privacy code that applies to their schools.
The Government has already implemented several proposals from the Privacy Act Review
through the Privacy and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2024 and has committed to
further reform to ensure Australia’s privacy laws are fit for purpose for the digital age,
including for the development and use of AI technologies, and provide a basis for both
innovation and the protection of people’s personal data. Relevant reforms under
consideration include updating key definitions and requiring information handling to be fair
and reasonable in the circumstances, having regard to a legislated list of factors including
the kind, sensitivity and amount of personal information, the risk of harm and (where
relevant) the best interests of the child.
To provide additional protection for children engaging in the digital world, a Children’s
Online Privacy Code will be in place by December 2026. The Code, being developed by the
Information Commissioner, will apply to online services likely to be accessed by children,
leveraging insights from international counterparts. Development of the Code is being
informed by public consultation, including with children, parents, and organisations focused
on the welfare of children.
14
