Australian Government response to the
House Standing Committee on Employment, Education and
Training report:
Shared vision, equal pathways
MARCH 2026
1
Introduction
The House Standing Committee on Employment, Education and Training’s inquiry report
into the perceptions and status of vocational education and training (VET) – Shared vision,
equal pathways was tabled in February 2024. The Australian Government (the Government)
recognises and acknowledges the work of members in preparing and delivering the report
and associated recommendations.
As highlighted by the Committee, Australia’s economic and social prosperity relies on a
highly skilled and qualified workforce to meet current skills shortages and future needs. Jobs
and Skills Australia (JSA) projections indicate that over 90% of the employment growth over
the 10 years to May 2035 will occur in occupations requiring a post-secondary qualification
(covering skill levels 1 to 4). Over half (54.3%) of this growth is anticipated to occur in
occupations related to a bachelor’s degree or higher as the primary education pathway (Skill
Level 1), and a further 40.1% in occupations with VET as the primary pathway (Skill Levels 2
to 4) (JSA, 2025).
VET is central to building Australia’s future by creating employment pathways for school
leavers, enabling working age Australians to reskill and upskill and supporting workforce
supply in nationally significant areas including construction, net zero, care and support,
digital skills and AI.
Through the National Skills Agreement, the Government is investing $12.6 billion over five
years to support the VET sector.
The 5-year National Skills Agreement (the Agreement) represents a fundamental shift in the
way the Commonwealth, state and territory governments work together to address
challenges and capitalise on shared opportunities in the VET system.
Since 1 January 2024, the Agreement has supported work to:
• deliver a national VET system that is high-quality, responsive and accessible
• support Australians to develop the skills and capabilities they need to obtain well-paid,
secure jobs
• ensure Australia has the skilled workforce it needs now and into the future, with TAFE
at the heart of the VET sector.
Under the Agreement, the Commonwealth is expanding and transforming access to the VET
sector, supporting training providers to deliver quality education and training, and
implementing reforms to address critical skills needs. The Agreement is also designed to
deliver an uplift in funding across all states and territories.
The Commonwealth’s funding includes up to $1.3 billion to implement agreed reforms to
strengthen the VET sector, this includes establishing TAFE Centres of Excellence, a National
TAFE Network, Closing the Gap initiatives designed in partnership with and led by First
Nations people, improvements to foundation skills training, and measures to improve VET
completions for women and other priority cohorts.
The new national stewardship model supports governments to work collaboratively and
purposefully towards national priorities, while providing states and territories with flexibility
to meet local skills needs. The first National Skills Plan, published in September 2024,
communicates Skills Ministers’ shared vision for the VET system and how governments will
work together to deliver shared outcomes and priorities. All jurisdictions, including the
2
Commonwealth, have published jurisdictional action plans outlining local action to deliver
on the National Skills Plan.
The Government is investing in communicating the quality, diversity and benefits of VET
pathways.
The Government has been working to improve perceptions and lift the status of VET by
improving the availability and quality of careers and pathways information.
This includes through the establishment of 10 Jobs and Skills Councils (JSCs) whose functions
include supporting learners and workers to make informed, evidence-based career decisions
within their respective sectors, and the Your Career website.
Your Career provides up-to-date, accurate industry, occupation and VET information to
support career related decision-making. Since its inception in October 2020, Your Career has
had over 7.4 million unique users and over 21.6 million page views. Your Career provides
independent, nationally relevant information about industries and occupations in Australia
linked to study, training and job options.
The Government has also produced publications targeted to specific cohorts including
resources to encourage conversations with primary-school aged students ‘Little Ripples’ and
First Nations primary school aged children ‘Little yarns, Big dreams’; resources for exploring
career pathways for people with disability; the Australian Jobs Report (co-produced with
Jobs and Skills Australia); and the School Leavers Information Kit (SLIK).
Successful VET career journeys are celebrated and showcased through initiatives such as the
Australian Training Awards, WorldSkills Australia and the VET Alumni. With over 700 VET
alumni ambassadors, comprised of individuals, Registered Training Organisations (RTO) and
businesses in all industries and states and territories sharing their stories and modelling
success in their chosen fields, initiatives like these support increased awareness and respect
for skills-based careers. The VET Alumni also play an important role in influencing policy
makers by providing user centred input to policy discussions, advisory groups and
committees, including the JSCs.
The Government supports the professionalisation and quality of careers advice and
guidance via the Australian Blueprint for Career Development (ABCD). Refreshed in
late 2022, the ABCD supports and builds the capability of Australia’s professional career
practitioners and career educators in schools. The ABCD has been downloaded
over 9,000 times and formed the basis of masterclass sessions attended by over
600 professional career practitioners.
Through the Careers Community of Practice (CCoP), continued dialogue between
Commonwealth and state and territory government officials responsible for careers
education is encouraged, including to share information, discuss best practice, increase
engagement and reduce duplication.
The Government is supporting students and encouraging priority groups into the VET sector
to gain the skills needed for Australia’s economic prosperity.
To support people looking to train or retrain and businesses which need more skilled
workers, the Government’s $1.2 billion Future Made in Australia skills plan is focused on
closing the gap in key areas of skills shortages with new places at university and TAFE.
This includes driving structural and cultural change via 20 partnership projects across key
3
male-dominated industries through the $60.6 million Building Women’s Careers program
and supporting women into flexible, safe and inclusive work and training opportunities.
The Government, in partnership with state and territory governments, is delivering
$1.5 billion in joint funding for over 500,000 Free TAFE and VET places across Australia from
2023 to 2026. Places are offered in fields of study in high demand and skills need and are
prioritised to cohorts who typically face barriers to education and training. From 1 January
2023 to 30 September 2025, there have been over 725,000 enrolments nationally. Over
254,000 enrolments have been by young people, over 178,000 by job seekers, over 61,000
by people with disability and over 44,000 by First Nations learners. Women make up over
half of the enrolments, with 448,000 enrolments (almost 62%). Over 248,000 enrolments
(over 34%) are by students in regional and remote locations.
The Government has now made Free TAFE a permanent feature of the national VET system,
investing over $1.6 billion to 2034-35 to support at least 100,000 places per year from 2027,
underpinned by the Free TAFE Act 2025.
The Australian Skills Guarantee introduced national targets for apprentices, trainees, paid
cadets and women working on eligible major government-funded construction and
information and communication technology projects from 1 July 2024. Since 1 July 2024, the
Government’s new model for Australian Apprenticeship Support Services is delivering
strengthened support such as mentoring for apprentices and employers, and greater
assistance for apprentices at the highest risk of noncompletion including women in male-
dominated trades and First Nations people.
Recognising the critical skills shortages in the construction and residential housing sector,
the Government has expanded and reframed the New Energy Apprenticeship Program
(NEAP) to the Key Apprenticeships Program (KAP), to ensure continued uptake in high
priority housing construction and new energy occupations.
The KAP, which commenced on 1 July 2025, includes two streams, a new Housing
Construction Apprenticeship (HCA) Stream to support apprentices in high priority housing
construction occupations, and a New Energy Apprenticeship (NEA) Stream to continue
supporting apprentices in clean energy occupations. On 1 December 2025, the Government
announced employers engaging an apprentice in an eligible KAP occupation is eligible to
continue to receive up to $5,000 from 1 January 2026.
The Government is committed to a joined up tertiary system with a shared vision and equal
pathways.
The Universities Accord final report reflects many of the same issues identified in Shared
vision, equal pathways. Australia’s tertiary education system must evolve to support better
harmonisation between VET and higher education to produce the skills, knowledge and
intellectual ambition required to respond to the nation’s current and emerging social,
economic and environmental challenges. Across tertiary education, there is a need to
encourage aspiration and increase attainment of historically under-represented cohorts. A
more seamless tertiary system where higher education and VET are viewed as equally
important pathways bringing different strengths will better meet the skills needs of
Australia now and in the future.
4
The Government is laying the foundations to better align VET and higher education through
the 2024-25 Tertiary Education Harmonisation measure which is supporting work to better
align VET and higher education pathways, improving credit transfer and recognition of prior
learning to allow easier movement between the VET and higher education sectors, and
improving tertiary data.
In addition, JSA’s February 2025 report, Opportunity and Productivity: Towards a Tertiary
Harmonisation Roadmap, presents a vision for a more connected, equitable and effective
tertiary education system. It identifies initial and longer-term reform priorities in
governance, funding alignment, and learner mobility, aimed at strategically aligning higher
education and VET while preserving their distinct roles. This alignment would support better
coordination among system actors to equip learners with the skills needed for a dynamic
labour market.
The Australian Tertiary Education Commission (ATEC) is leading the development of a
Tertiary Roadmap, in close collaboration with JSA, the Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations (DEWR) and the Department of Education. The Tertiary Roadmap will
identify the next steps to make it easier for students to move between the VET and higher
education sectors. It will set up the system to support students to gain qualifications
matched to Australia’s future skills needs.
A Tertiary System Advisory Council is also being established to support ATEC drive this work.
It will be chaired by the JSA Commissioner, Professor Barney Glover AO, with other
members to include representatives from the Commonwealth, states and territories,
industry, unions, and the VET and higher education sectors.
To lift the status of VET, the Government is committed to continuing to build a stronger,
more equitable, desirable, dynamic and agile VET sector that meets the workforce
challenges of the future and provides learners with an enriched, work-based, integrated
learning experience that builds skills and knowledge.
To ensure the perception of VET reflects the high-quality training provided, the Government
is working with states and territories to support an increasingly diverse range of students to
access skills and training (including foundation skills) that set them up to find secure, well-
paid jobs.
See Appendix A on page 29 for a high-level summary of recommendations and responses.
5
Recommendation Government Response
Recommendation 1 The Government SUPPORTS this recommendation
The Committee recommends the Australian Government work with state and
territory governments and key stakeholders such as the National Centre for The Government is committed to working with state and
Vocational Education Research to improve data collection and reporting territory governments, and stakeholders to improve data
mechanisms in the vocational education and training sector. This should collection and reporting in VET. The National Skills Agreement
include a focus on the diversity of pathways within the sector and on better outlines a commitment for the Australian, state and territory
understanding the complex barriers faced by students. governments and key stakeholders, such as the National
Centre for Vocational Education Research, to cooperate to
enhance the reliability and timely access to high quality VET
activity data and information, including to measure the
achievement of outcomes and support reform within the VET
system.
The Government is also undertaking work as a response to the
VET Workforce Blueprint to develop a data strategy to enable
the collection of VET workforce data to support policy and VET
workforce strategies.
Recommendation 2 The Government NOTES this recommendation
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government enhance the
functions of the National Careers Institute (NCI) to ensure the NCI is able to The Government is supporting the provision of careers
operate as a single, trusted source of information on education, training, and information through the Your Career website which provides
careers. The primary focus of the NCI should be supporting key influencers industry, occupation and VET course and provider information
such as teachers, employment service providers, and career educators. This to support careers related decision-making. Updates to the
should include but should not be limited to the following measures: Your Career website in early 2025include the addition of the
Career Explorer, which provides users with information based
• Overhaul the Your Career website and replace it with a new online portal
on their needs and aspirations, providing unbiased results
which provides accurate, relevant, and current information on courses,
informed by research, labour market insights and insights from
qualifications, and career pathways. This should include measures to
industry experts. The algorithm which supports the search
• enable the NCI to offer additional information on individual training functions on Your Career has been enhanced to provide
providers and courses relevant results based on the search criteria entered. These
6
• ensure that information provided to users is based on the user’s needs functional updates enable easier searching and navigation of
and aspirations and does not indicate a ‘default’ preference for the website.
courses or qualifications in a specific tertiary sector
Jobs and Skills Australia (JSA) also plays an important role in
• ensure that users can easily navigate online resources.
providing expert information and advice on the current,
• In collaboration with Jobs and Skills Australia, the National Centre for
emerging and future skills and human capital needs of the
Vocational Education Research, and the Jobs and Skills Councils,
economy.
identifying and addressing future skills needs and actively promoting
careers which respond to those needs. The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations
• Ensuring that career educators in schools, Technical and Further (DEWR) engaged Ninti One, a First Nations-owned not-for-profit
Education (TAFE), and employment service providers are aware of the NCI organisation, to develop a suite of resources to ensure
and can use it as a resource in performing their functions. opportunities for First Nations peoples are maximised in the
• Identifying and addressing duplication in sources of information on transition to net zero. The resources aim to build awareness
careers and vocational education and training (VET) at the national, state, and strengthen visibility of job opportunities for First Nations
and local levels. peoples and help to create culturally safe work and learning
environments in the decarbonisation workforce. This project
Explore creating a grants funding program to support and enable the
was completed in June 2025, and the resources are having a
expansion of proven, evidence-based local career education programs.
strong impact as DEWR and Ninti One continue to promote
them to industry and government stakeholders.
DEWR is also promoting clean energy careers as part of the
Future Made in Australia initiative. To date this has included
promotion of clean energy careers on the Your Career website
and in the 2024 Australian Jobs Report, and the development of
a Careers in STEM Job Kit for the occupation of electrician, with
9,000 hard copies distributed nationally to educational
institutions, careers advisers and STEM organisations.
Recommendation 3 The Government SUPPORTS IN PRINCIPLE this
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, via the recommendation
National Careers Institute, work with State and Territory Governments to
boost the capacity of vocational education and training alumni programs, The Government recognises the value of alumni programs in
including to develop work plans to underpin proactive outreach to schools, providing ‘living proof’ of the many ways a person can succeed
business associations, and employment bodies. through vocational education and training (VET). The
7
Department of Employment and Workplace Relations works
closely with states and territories in managing the Australian
Training Awards, WorldSkills Australia and Australian VET
Alumni ambassador program.
Recommendation 4 The Government SUPPORTS IN PRINCIPLE this
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State recommendation
and Territory Governments, the Jobs and Skills Councils, and other key
stakeholders to design and deliver national campaigns to promote vocational Jobs and Skills Councils (JSCs) functions include mapping and
education and training (VET) pathways and the careers they serve. promoting education and career pathways in industries in their
Campaigns should be promoted at the national, state, and local levels, and remit, and assisting learners and workers to make well-
should include material that: informed, evidence-based career decisions.
• Is diffused through a variety of media sources, including social media, Several JSCs are already undertaking work in this area. For
government websites, and television. example, HumanAbility, the JSC for the aged and disability
• Is accessible to all audiences. services, health, human services, children’s education and
• Is adapted—insofar as possible—to local areas and labour markets, with a care, and sport and recreation sectors, has recently completed
view to highlighting the value of VET to local communities. a project to identify, showcase and promote career pathways
• Targets different entry pathways to VET, including post-secondary across the aged, disability and veterans’ care and support
pathways and pathways for adult learners. sectors. Manufacturing Industry Skills Alliance, the JSC for the
• Showcases the benefits of the apprenticeship and traineeship pathways. manufacturing sector, has launched ManuFACTuring, a
• Targets diverse cohorts, with a focus on improving perceptions for women, national campaign to promote the wide range of opportunities
First Nations peoples, and people from culturally and linguistically diverse in the modern, innovative and future focused manufacturing
backgrounds. industry.
• Showcases positive experiences with VET and examples of success
among VET graduates.
• Showcases a variety of career opportunities enabled by the VET sector,
with a focus on in-demand industries and potential areas of skills
shortage.
Campaigns should be underpinned by robust monitoring and evaluation
processes to ensure their impact can be measured and to inform and refine
future marketing initiatives.
Recommendation 5 The Government NOTES this recommendation
8
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, via the
The Government acknowledges the need to promote both VET
National Careers Institute, work with State and Territory Governments to
and university as equally legitimate and valuable post-
support and incentivise schools to promote vocational education and training
secondary pathways and works closely with state and territory
(VET) to students and parents, including promoting VET and university as
governments and other stakeholders to support this.
equally legitimate and valuable post-secondary pathways. This should
include:
The Government also supports best practice in the provision of
• Actively championing VET in promotional material and information relating career information for schools, through the Australian Blueprint
to education and training. for Career Development (ABCD), developed with the Career
• Developing clear, accessible, nationally consistent information resources Industry Council of Australia (CICA), which supports schools
for use by students, parents, teachers, and other influencers. and career educators in understanding best practice in design,
• Developing best-practice guidelines for schools to promote VET pathways, implementation and evaluation of career development learning.
informed by consultation with education experts. The ABCD is available on the Your Career website, along with
supporting material for its use.
Establishing and raising the profile of student advisory groups and steering
committees, including by ensuring that there is a mechanism to capture
student views in the development of state and national education policy.
9
Recommendation 6 The Government NOTES this recommendation
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State
and Territory Governments to examine the impact of the Australian Tertiary The Government believes that VET and higher education
Admissions Ranking (ATAR) framework on the quality and uptake of pathways should be presented as equally valuable
vocational education and training (VET) pathways in secondary schools, opportunities to secondary school students and is committed
including: to working with state and territory governments and non-
government schools sector representatives to address
• The extent to which the ATAR and university entrance are used to
potential biases in the system.
determine resourcing for schools, with a view to introducing new metrics
which value both VET and university pathways. The Government is currently working with states and territories
• How VET and non-VET subjects contribute to ATAR scores, with a view to to improve university admissions practices through a National
removing disincentives in the ATAR framework to students pursuing VET Admissions Framework.
pathways during secondary school and promoting national consistency in
how VET subjects are treated within that framework. Commonwealth recurrent funding for schools is based on the
Schooling Resource Standard. Higher education admission
practices, and the use of the ATAR, have no bearing on
Commonwealth resourcing for schools.
Recommendation 7 The Government SUPPORTS this recommendation
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State
and Territory Governments to champion examples of education and career The Government champions education and career success
success which are not linked to the Australian Tertiary Admissions Ranking or through the Australian VET Alumni program which aims to raise
to a university pathway. the status of VET and encourage people to consider a VET
pathway.
Recommendation 8 The Government NOTES this recommendation
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government review entry
pathways into vocational education and training (VET) and university, with a Skills Ministers have agreed to an updated Training Package
view to developing a measure of success which can be used to support entry Organising Framework (effective 1 July 2025) which embeds a
into both sectors. This should include the examination of learner profiles as a new, purpose-led, principles-based approach to VET
potential entry mechanism. qualification design; including opportunities to improve
pathways and support for life-long learning that meets the
needs of industry and learners. Jobs and Skills Councils are
leading the reform via training package product development
activity, regularly reporting back to ministers.
10
The Government is also delivering on reforms recommended by
the Universities Accord, including improving credit recognition
between VET and higher education.
Recommendation 9 The Government NOTES this recommendation
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State
and Territory Governments to develop and implement a national strategy for The Government recognises the importance of career
career education in schools, including the following measures: education delivered through the Australian school system and
its role in improving education and employment outcomes for
• Career education starting in primary school and continuing to the end of
students.
secondary school. Career education should vary by year level, and there
should be a minimum number of contact hours for each student. The Government has supported the development of the
• Australian secondary schools have at least one accredited career Australian Blueprint for Careers Development (ABCD), the
practitioner. national framework that supports best practice design,
• Improved professional development for career educators and teachers, implementation and evaluation of career development which
including courses which build capacity to work with students from diverse can be used in a school context.
cohorts.
The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations also
• Nationally consistent and up-to-date career information and resources,
convenes and facilitates the state and territory Careers
including on VET and university study options.
Communities of Practice to support information sharing,
• A career education framework at the school level, including plans to
discussion of best practice, and engagement across
- appoint a school career leader with the function of coordinating careers jurisdictions.
education—including to ensure that all teachers are equipped to
provide career advice if needed
- engage with students and parents on career planning, including to
inform parents about potential VET and university pathways
- measures to build closer connections with and increase students’
exposure to VET-related industries.
The National Career Institute, Jobs and Skills Australia, and the Jobs and
Skills Councils should be actively involved in the development and
implementation of the strategy. The strategy should be developed in close
consultation with professional bodies such as the Career Industry Council of
Australia, academic, policy, and education experts, teachers and students,
sector regulators, and other key stakeholders.
11
Recommendation 10 The Government SUPPORTS IN PRINCIPLE this
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State recommendation
and Territory Governments to enhance the quality and consistency of
vocational education and training delivered to secondary school students The Government is committed to improving the quality of VET
(VETDSSS). This should include the following key measures: delivered to secondary school students (VETDSSS) and is
working collaboratively with state and territory governments to
• Establish cooperative arrangements between secondary schools,
this end. Through this work, governments will identify
technical and further education (TAFE) institutes, and industry to underpin
challenges and barriers to quality delivery and explore
the design and delivery of VETDSSS. Key priorities for these partnerships
opportunities for enhancements at both the Australian and
should include:
state and territory government level.
- overcoming barriers to the delivery of VETDSSS through TAFEs;
- better integrating VET courses with the broader school curriculum,
underpinned by an understanding that VETDSSS should not, in
principle, be different to ‘mainstream’ VET;
- encouraging and enabling industry to offer meaningful work experience
to VETDSSS students, where appropriate; and
- ensuring that VETDSSS courses are responsive to industry needs.
• Provide targeted investment for schools to deliver VETDSSS, with funding
conditional on schools delivering VETDSSS in partnership with TAFEs.
• Ensure that all VETDSSS courses can lead to or be counted towards a
nationally recognised qualification.
Recommendation 11 The Government SUPPORTS IN PRINCIPLE this
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State recommendation
and Territory Governments, education experts and the vocational education
and training (VET) and university sectors to implement the following The Government is working collaboratively with state and
measures: territory governments to identify challenges and barriers to
improve the supply of VET teachers in secondary schools, and
• Additional initial teacher education (ITE) programs with a VET speciality.
to strengthen their preparation.
• Additional ITE programs which focus on enabling industry experts to
become qualified VET delivered to secondary school students (VETDSSS)
educators, including ‘fast track’ programs where appropriate.
12
• Adding units on VET into all ITE courses, to ensure all teachers are able to
provide reliable, accurate information on VET to their students.
Recommendation 12 The Government SUPPORTS this recommendation
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State
and Territory Governments to ensure that all Australian schools are funded to The Australian Government has reached agreement with every
100 per cent of the Schooling Resourcing Standard. state and territory government to get all public schools on a
path to 100 per cent of the Schooling Resource Standard (SRS)
through the Better and Fairer Schools Agreement 2025-2034
and the Better and Fairer Schools Agreement 2025-2034 – Full
and Fair Funding (collectively known as the BFSA).
Under the BFSAs, the Australian Government is lifting its share
of the SRS for public schools to 25 per cent by 2034 in every
state and the ACT, and 40 per cent in the Northern Territory.
Additional funding is tied to reforms to improve educational
outcomes for all Australian students.
Reforms are focused on three priority areas: equity and
excellence, wellbeing for learning and engagement, and a
strong and sustainable workforce. These reform areas have
been designed to ensure all students can access a quality
education and provide the support to help all students finish
school and reach their educational potential.
Recommendation 13 The Government SUPPORTS IN PRINCIPLE this
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State recommendation
and Territory Governments, education experts, and other stakeholders to
streamline the process of developing and accrediting vocational education Under the 2024-25 Tertiary Education Harmonisation measure
and training qualifications. This should include: the Government funded the Australian Skills Quality Authority
(ASQA) to scope and pilot delegating its course accreditation
• Setting a pathway for technical and further education (TAFE) institutes to
function to selected TAFEs to enable them to create, approve
self-accredit courses and qualifications, supported by robust safeguards.
and deliver accredited VET courses. The pilot ran from
13
• Allowing minor amendments to training packages to take place at the Jobs December 2024 through to 30 June 2025 and provided valuable
and Skills Council (JSC) level, subject to industry consultation. insights to inform consideration of ongoing expansion and
scalability of delegation of the course accreditation function.
These are nationally accredited courses outside of national
training package qualifications.
Under the Training Package Organising Framework, minor
changes to national training package products, made by Jobs
and Skills Councils in consultation with stakeholders, do not
require the full development and endorsement process, or
compliance assessment, and are recorded as minor releases
on the National Training Register.
Recommendation 14 The Government SUPPORTS IN PRINCIPLE this
The Committee recommends that as part of the ongoing process of recommendation
qualification and skills reform, the Australian Government review existing
training packages to simplify the training ecosystem and reduce unused, Skills Ministers have agreed to an updated Training Package
duplicative, or clearly unnecessary products. This should include Organising Framework (effective 1 July 2025) which embeds a
consideration of occupational profiles as a means of identifying where full new purpose-led approach to qualification design, guided by
training packages are and are not required, and as a means of enhancing the strengthened principles to underpin development. These
development of training packages which respond to industry need. include removing duplication and unnecessary specification to
enable flexible and high-quality delivery and drawing on broad
industry and educator expertise when developing
qualifications.
Jobs and Skills Councils (JSCs) are leading the reform via
training package product development activity, regularly
reporting back to ministers. JSCs also have a role in considering
occupational profiles and pathways mapping as part of
workforce planning and training package development work.
Recommendation 15 The Government SUPPORTS this recommendation
14
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government ensure the
Jobs and Skills Councils (JSCs) bring together employers,
ongoing process of qualification and skills reform support a collaborative
unions and governments in a tripartite arrangement to find
approach to the development of qualifications and units of competency,
solutions to skills and workforce challenges and to develop fit-
involving industry, employers, workers, and unions.
for-purpose qualifications. JSCs are responsible for undertaking
comprehensive stakeholder engagement during their training
package development work including with relevant industry
peaks, employers, unions and training providers.
Recommendation 16 The Government NOTES this recommendation
The Committee recommends that the Australian Skills Quality Authority
(ASQA) work with Jobs and Skills Australia, the Jobs and Skills Councils (JSC) ASQA is responsible for regulating approximately 90% of
and other key stakeholders to develop and implement robust assessment Australian VET providers and accredits VET ‘accredited
guidelines for use in the vocational education and training sector. courses’ (courses providing training that is not being met
through national training packages and which needs to be
nationally recognised) to ensure they meet nationally approved
standards. Development of assessment guidelines which align
with industry need is not within the remit of ASQA.
Jobs and Skills Council functions include working with RTOs to
connect nationally recognised training products with delivery
and assessment of training, including developing resources for
RTOs, trainers, assessors and employers to improve training
and assessment practices (noting specific projects are
determined based on industry needs identified through
workforce planning).
Recommendation 17 The Government NOTES this recommendation
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State
and Territory Governments, education experts and other key stakeholders to Skills Ministers have agreed to an updated Training Package
explore introducing proficiency-based assessment into the vocational Organising Framework (effective 1 July 2025) which embeds a
education and training sector. new purpose-led, principles-based approach to qualification
design, with ongoing state and territory engagement to align
policy and funding. The approach includes a new unit of
15
competency – Application of Skills and Knowledge template,
with provision to add grading/proficiency assessment guidance
under the supporting Companion Volume Implementation
Guide.
Recommendation 18 The Government SUPPORTS this recommendation
The Committee recommends the Australian Government expressly recognise
and address systemic barriers that hinder participation by women and by The Government is focused on increasing the profile of
gender diverse people in vocational education and training (VET), with a women’s participation in VET, particularly in trade roles. This
specific focus on lifting women’s participation in male-dominated industries. includes through investing $60.6 million over 4 years in the
This should include but not be limited to: Building Women’s Careers program which aims to drive
structural and cultural change through 20 partnership projects
• Investing in strategies delivered through the VET sector that support
across key male dominated industries and improving women’s
women in acquiring skills and entering male-dominated industries.
access to flexible, safe and inclusive work and training
• Addressing workplace discrimination and gender-based violence and
opportunities.
ensuring equitable employment conditions.
• Introducing additional apprenticeship pathways which specifically target National targets have been set through the Australian Skills
women and gender-diverse people. Guarantee for apprentices, trainees, paid cadets and women
working on eligible major Government-funded construction and
Implementing promotional and educational campaigns which challenge
information and communication technology (ICT) projects.
gender stereotypes and negative attitudes that perpetuate barriers for both
women and men in non-traditional VET pathways.
Under a new support services model introduced on 1 July 2024,
Apprentice Connect Australia Providers identify women in
male‑dominated trades as a key client group. Providers deliver
strengthened wraparound support to improve retention and
completion rates.
Jobs and Skills Councils also have an important role to play in
considering opportunities to address gender imbalances across
industry through their workforce planning and project activities.
Women undertaking study in non-traditional fields are a priority
cohort under Free TAFE.
16
Recommendation 19 The Government SUPPORTS IN PRINCIPLE this
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State recommendation
and Territory Governments, Jobs and Skills Australia (JSA), industry
participants, and other key stakeholders to lift and incentivise participation in Jobs and Skills Councils (JSCs) have an important role to play in
traditionally female dominated vocational education and training (VET) areas considering opportunities to address gender imbalances across
including fashion and textiles. industry in their workforce planning and project activities. For
example, HumanAbility, the JSC for the aged and disability
services, health, human services, children’s education and
care, and sport and recreation sectors, has identified the need
to attract more men into the care and support sector through
current and planned projects.
Jobs and Skills Australia (JSA) provides detailed, evidence-
based research and advice on how Australia’s training systems
and labour market are gendered, and what opportunities there
are to improve equity outcomes including through its Gender
Economic Equality Study.
JSA have highlighted how gender workforce issues can have
wide reaching impacts on our labour market, productivity, and
our ability to meet our skills potential. As an example, recent
JSA data revealed that gender-skewed workforces, such as
male-dominated trade and female-dominated caring roles, are
more vulnerable to skills shortages, contributing to substantial
labour challenges for those critical industries.
Recommendation 20 The Government SUPPORTS IN PRINCIPLE this
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government develop and recommendation
implement a pilot program for a new, specialised, industry-led network of
apprenticeship support providers to deliver industry-appropriate mentoring The Government rolled out a new suite of apprenticeship
and support to apprentices and trainees. This should include tailored support services from 1 July 2024, delivering strengthened
assistance for apprentices and trainees from disadvantaged and support for apprentices and trainees who are at the highest risk
underrepresented backgrounds, including women, First Nations peoples, of non-completion, including women apprentices in male-
dominated trades, First Nations apprentices, and clean energy
17
people with disability, and people from culturally and linguistically diverse apprentices. Additionally, the Strategic Review of the Australian
backgrounds. Apprenticeship Incentive System (Strategic Review) examined
the role of apprenticeship services and supports to inform
The learnings from this pilot program should be adapted to future design and longer-term policy settings in line with its Terms of Reference.
tender processes for apprenticeship support providers, including the current The findings of the Strategic Review are being used to inform
Australian Apprenticeship Support Network and Australian Apprenticeship Government options going forward.
Support Services.
Recommendation 21 The Government NOTES this recommendation
The Committee recommends that as part of the ongoing process of skills
reform, the Australian Government explore measures to increase take-home The Strategic Review of the Australian Apprenticeships
wages for apprentices and trainees. This should include consideration of Incentive System (Strategic Review) considered how cost of
measures to ensure gender pay equity in apprenticeships and traineeships so living pressures impact apprenticeship and traineeship take up
far as this is possible. and completion in the current economic context. The findings of
the Strategic Review are being used to inform Government’s
future policy options going forward.
18
Recommendation 22 The Government SUPPORTS IN PRINCIPLE this
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State recommendation
and Territory Governments to explore measures to increase consistency
across jurisdictions as to the qualifications that are offered as
The Strategic Review of the Australian Apprenticeships
apprenticeships. This should include consideration of expanding
Incentive System (Strategic Review) considered how to reduce
apprenticeships to new sectors and industries where this is warranted.
complexity and improve understanding of apprenticeships
across all jurisdictions. The findings of the Strategic Review are
being used to inform Government’s future policy options.
In addition to the Strategic Review, the Skills and Workforce
Ministerial Council (SWMC) is progressing work as part of the
SWMC Future Apprenticeships and Traineeships Workplan
(Workplan) to maximise shared stewardship of the
apprenticeship system. The outcomes of this work will help the
Australian Government, in partnership with states and
territories, better coordinate the apprenticeship system.
TAFE Centres of Excellence established under the National
Skills Agreement are partnering with industry to create new
degree-level apprenticeships, especially in areas of high skills
need such as net zero, digital, and care sectors. Centres of
Excellence are nationally networked and required to share
best‑practice teaching products and innovations across TAFEs.
Recommendation 23 The Government NOTES this recommendation
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State
and Territory Governments, Jobs and Skills Australia, academic and policy The Government is delivering on reforms recommended by the
experts, and the vocational education and training (VET) and university Australian Universities Accord, including improving credit
sectors to design and implement a national policy framework for micro- recognition between VET and higher education. The
credentials, including the following key elements: Government is also working to progress changes to the
Australian Qualification Framework (AQF) and providing better
• A clear definition of a ‘micro-credential’ to inform policy decisions.
guidance on recognition of prior learning, including recognition
of microcredentials. Guidance material is also being developed
19
• A clear default principle that micro-credentials cannot be undertaken in for inclusion in the AQF. This will strengthen recognition of
lieu of full qualifications and cannot, on their own, ‘stack’ into full microcredentials for credit or articulation towards
qualifications. qualifications.
• Clear guidance on the circumstances in which micro-credentials can be
recognised as credit towards full qualifications—for example where a
person is seeking to transition to another industry or return to the
workforce.
• Clear guidance on the circumstances in which government funding will be
available in relation to micro-credentials, including that:
- as a default principle, micro-credentials only receive Commonwealth
funding where they are portable and targeted to identified areas of
skills shortage, and where the student already possesses a full VET or
university qualification; and
- micro-credentials which relate to occupational licensing or other
job-specific requirements should typically be funded by the employer
or the individual, with exceptions made for people in financial
hardship.
Recommendation 24 The Government SUPPORTS IN PRINCIPLE this
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government expedite the recommendation
development and implementation of the vocational education and training
(VET) Workforce Blueprint, and ensure the Blueprint considers measures to: The VET Workforce Blueprint, published in October 2024, has
the key objectives of growing, retaining and developing, and
• lift pay and conditions for VET educators, including measures to reduce
understanding the VET workforce and was informed by Jobs and
short term and casual contracts and make the sector attractive to trainers
Skills Australia’s VET Workforce Study. Developed
of all genders and backgrounds. This should include consideration of
collaboratively with states and territories, the Blueprint
ringfenced funding for Technical and Further Education (TAFE) to underpin
identifies 8 opportunities and 14 actions to grow and support a
more competitive pay and conditions
high-quality and sustainable VET workforce.
• enable various entry pathways to the teaching workforce, including
The Government is implementing a suite of nationally led
pathways which encourage entrants with considerable experience in
actions to:
industry and with advanced qualifications. This should include exploring
measures to allow people who do not hold a specialised VET teaching • drive better data and improve our understanding of the VET
qualification such as the Certificate IV in Training and Assessment (TAE) workforce
enter the teaching workforce
20
• reduce cost and red tape associated with completing the TAE. This should • build the First Nations VET workforce
include consideration of fully subsidising the TAE and of expanding fast- • grow and support the VET workforce through industry
track pathways such as the ‘Pay to Learn’ program specific projects including for the critical sectors of
• ensure educators can provide a supportive learning environment for electrical and construction.
students. This should include consideration of including units on culturally
competent and trauma-informed pedagogy in qualifications for VET Under the NSA, the government is investing $70.0m in matched
educators, and ensure that reliable, accurate data on the teaching funding for local measures to support attraction, retention and
workforce is gathered to enable continuous improvement development of the VET workforce. This includes measures that
• enhance the capacity and expertise of the VET workforce to apply an provide supported pathways to undertake the TAE where
jurisdictions have identified this as a priority.
intersectional lens and analysis across VET policies, programs, and
initiatives, with reference to barriers facing women.
Fee-Free TAFE provides further options for individuals to
undertake the TAE at low or no cost.
The Government has also supported the development of
resources to strengthen the capability of educators, registered
training organisations (RTOs) and training product developers to
support student mental health and students with disability in
VET. These resources will help providers meet requirements
under the 2025 Standards for Registered Training Organisations
(the 2025 Standards), which include a greater focus on learner
support.
The 2025 Standards Credential Policy sets out the credential
requirements for those delivering training and assessment in
the VET sector; ensuring training and assessment is only
delivered by appropriately credentialled people, with current
skills and knowledge in training and assessment.
The 2025 Standards also enable RTOs to engage industry
experts to support training and assessment and provide
practical insight into real workplace settings, recognising this
can add value, variety and interest into the training program.
21
Importantly however, the 2025 Standards impose parameters
around the use of industry experts to maintain the quality and
integrity of training, including that industry experts are only
authorised to work under the direction of a person who meets
the requirements of the Credential Policy.
Recommendation 25 The Government NOTES this recommendation
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government ensure that the
ongoing process of skills reform include measures to encourage and support States and territories are responsible for the management of
partnerships between technical and further education (TAFE) institutes and the vocational education and training system in their
high-performing not-for-profit and industry-led providers. jurisdictions, including partnership arrangements between their
TAFEs and other registered training organisations.
Recommendation 26 The Government NOTES this recommendation
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State
and Territory Governments to explore options to separate vocational Implementation of qualification reforms will inform future
education and training (VET) into ‘education’ and ‘training’, including funding consideration by Skills Ministers about VET system settings.
and governance arrangements to support high-performing independent
providers to deliver shorter and industry-specific courses and to prioritise the
delivery of longer courses and qualifications through technical and further
education (TAFE) institutes.
Recommendation 27 The Government SUPPORTS this recommendation
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State
and Territory Governments and with the Australian Skills Quality Authority The 2025 Standards for Registered Training Organisations
(ASQA) to rationalise and improve regulation in the vocational education and (RTOs) commenced on 1 July 2025. They aim to strengthen the
training (VET) sector, including by better targeting regulatory and compliance focus on quality outcomes for learners and employers, provide
action to deliberately or persistently noncompliant providers. This should greater clarity, and allow for more flexibility and innovation in
include the following key measures: training delivery.
• The removal of duplicative administrative and reporting requirements. Amendments to the National Vocational Education and Training
• Giving ASQA greater flexibility in terms of how it prioritises, considers, and Regulator Act 2011 have been made to address integrity risks to
makes decisions in relation to applications for regulation. the VET sector.
22
• Strengthening registration requirements to prevent providers from
In 2023 the Government invested $37.8 million to establish an
changing the scope of their registration whether they have been operating
integrity unit within ASQA, upgrade ASQA’s digital and data
for less than 2 years.
systems and create a tip-off line to address threats to integrity.
• Providing that a provider’s registration automatically lapses when that
provider has not delivered training or assessment for a period of 12
ASQA is continuing to work with dual sector providers and
months.
Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Agency (TEQSA) to
Resourcing and supporting ASQA to focus its regulatory approach on lifting minimise duplicative administrative and reporting
the quality of training in the sector, enhancing VET student outcomes, and requirements.
building and maintaining a culture of continuous learning and improvement.
The Government is investing $4.7 million in 2025-26 for ASQA to
undertake a surge in enforcement activity to immediately
respond to large-scale fraudulent issuance of VET
qualifications. This is bolstering ASQA’s capacity to take further
action to mitigate public safety risks, safeguard the integrity of
VET qualifications, and protect the reputation of Australia’s VET
sector.
In response to the VET Workforce Blueprint, the Australian
Government is undertaking work to map and analyse
compliance and administrative activity across the VET sector to
better understand this activity and to identify opportunities to
alleviate this activity for the VET workforce, where appropriate.
Recommendation 28 The Government NOTES this recommendation
The Committee recommends that as part of the ongoing process of skills
reform, the Australian Government work with State and Territory States and territories are responsible for the setting of the fees
Governments and with the vocational education and training (VET) sector to: and subsidies in their jurisdictions. The Government continues
to monitor the VET Student Loans Program and how it interacts
• explore aligning fees and subsidy amounts for VET qualifications to the
with Free TAFE.
greatest extent possible
• review the VET Student Loans (VSL) scheme and investigate its
relationship with Fee-Free TAFE.
Recommendation 29 The Government NOTES this recommendation
23
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State
It is important that decisions around the VET sector include the
and Territory Governments to ensure that the lived experiences of individuals
needs of students. The 5-year National Skills Agreement (NSA)
involved with or impacted by the vocational education and training (VET)
between the Australian, state and territory governments,
sector are prioritised in advisory and governance mechanisms.
commenced on 1 January 2024, and sets out desired system
outcomes, including in relation to student needs.
The Government has established advisory boards with
members with lived experience. For example, the Jobs and
Skills Australia (JSA) Ministerial Advisory Board, established in
March 2024, has specific members with lived experience of
disadvantage within VET or higher education across First
Nations, people with disabilities and gender equality. The Board
is a critical part of JSA’s governance arrangements and provides
advice to the JSA Commissioner and the Minister for Skills and
Training.
24
Recommendation 30 The Government SUPPORTS this recommendation
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State
and Territory Governments to: The Government is committed to upgrading and modernising
TAFE campuses and improving support services. The
• continue to upgrade and modernise facilities on technical and further
Government is providing $50 million to states and territories
education (TAFE) institute campuses, including to ensure that physical
through the TAFE Technology Fund to support TAFEs to upgrade
and digital spaces are accessible for students with disability
and expand their facilities, including laboratories, workshops
• improve key support services on TAFE campuses, and ensure that
and IT services.
students have access to counselling, career advice, legal services, health
services, and disability support In addition, the $35 million Clean Energy Capital Investment
• establish robust mechanisms for student and staff representation. Fund is expanding and upgrading training capacity across a
broader set of clean energy skills and training areas.
The Government has also committed through the National
Skills Agreement – Improved Completions initiative
$250 million, to be matched by states and territories, to trial,
evaluate and scale innovative and best practice initiatives to
help students complete their studies.
Recommendation 31 The Government SUPPORTS IN PRINCIPLE this
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State recommendation
and Territory Governments and the sector to increase engagement by
technical and further education (TAFE) institutes with students early in their Since 1 July 2024, a pre-commencement assessment of
training pathway, to ensure students fully understand the demands of the apprentices and employers is undertaken by Apprentice
qualification and can make informed decisions about their training and career Connect Australia Providers. This assessment is designed to
pathway. This should involve the development of tools to assess students’ assess the apprentice and employer’s readiness for the
aptitude for the units and qualifications they are looking to pursue and apprenticeship and identifying the support required to improve
supporting tailored advice. the likelihood of successful completion.
Under the 2025 Standards for registered training organisations
(RTOs), RTOs are required to provide accurate and accessible
information to enable students to make informed decisions
about whether the RTO and training product is right for them.
Where a prospective student does not have the required skills
and competencies needed to successfully participate in a
25
training product, RTOs are expected to advise the person on the
suitability of the training product for them.
Recommendation 32 The Government SUPPORTS this recommendation
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government ensure that the
skills reform agenda includes specific measures to boost access to The National Skills Agreement is delivering significant
vocational education and training (VET) for people in regional, rural, and investment in the national VET system to provide high quality,
remote areas, informed by local skills need. responsive and accessible education and training. Under the
Agreement, governments are working towards shared national
priorities while also retaining flexibility to address local skills
and training needs.
JSA’s regional roadmap provides detailed, place-based insights
into local workforce barriers and training needs, helping the
Government tailor VET access measures for regional, rural and
remote communities.
Free TAFE is also supporting students in regional, rural and
remote areas, with over 248,000 enrolments (over 34%) in
regional and remote areas over the period 1 January 2023 to 30
September 2025.
A Remote Training Hubs Network to First Nations people has
also been established ($30 million over 5 years) to help Central
Australian First Nations people access on-country VET.
On 2 August 2025, the Prime Minister announced $31 million for
Mobile TAFE. Mobile training units will enable VET providers to
take skills on the road and train the next generation of workers
in outer regional and remote areas. The government is working
with states and territories to implement Mobile TAFE, who will
partner with First Nations organisations to identify projects that
will meet local skills needs.
26
Recommendation 33 The Government SUPPORTS IN PRINCIPLE this
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government implement the recommendation
recommendations of the Australian Universities Accord Final Report, and
work with State and Territory Governments and other key stakeholders to The Australian Government is laying the foundations for a more
define a roadmap to a genuinely integrated tertiary education system. This connected and responsive tertiary education system that
roadmap should include the following key elements: leverages the strengths of the VET and higher education
sectors. In response to the Universities Accord the Government
is bringing the two sectors to work more closely together to
• Integrated funding arrangements which support lifelong learning.
improve education pathways for students including through
• Clearly defined guidelines for the qualifications that can be offered by
better credit recognition and ensuring that they gain the skills
vocational education and training (VET) providers and by universities.
needed by industry and the economy in the future, particularly
• Clearly defined guidelines and targeted funding for dual qualifications
in areas of national priority.
which align with current and emerging skills needs, including advanced
apprenticeships. A Tertiary Roadmap is being developed to identify the next
• Clear pathways between VET and university courses and qualifications, steps to make it easier for students to move between the VET
with defined entry points and processes for credit transfer. and higher education sectors. It will set up the system to
• An adaptive, user-friendly framework for the recognition of prior learning. support students to gain qualifications matched to Australia’s
• Service-level agreements between the regulators responsible for the VET future skills needs.
and university sectors to reduce duplication and streamline process.
The development of a Tertiary Roadmap will be led by the
The development of the roadmap should be led by a coordinating council,
Australian Tertiary Education Commission (ATEC) in close
with representatives from Commonwealth and State Government, and from
collaboration with Jobs and Skills Australia (JSC), the
both the VET and university sectors.
Department of Employment and Workplace Relations and the
Department of Education.
A Tertiary System Advisory Council is being established to
support ATEC drive this work. It will be chaired by the JSA
Commissioner, Professor Barney Glover AO, with other
members to include representatives from Commonwealth,
states and territories, industry, unions, and the VET and higher
education sectors.
27
Australian Skills Quality Authority (ASQA) and Tertiary
Education Quality Standards Authority (TEQSA) published a
Dual Sector Regulatory Strategy in September 2025, which
identifies opportunities to streamline regulation and reduce
administrative burden while maintaining quality assurance for
providers registered in both sectors.
Recommendation 34 The Government NOTES this recommendation
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, through the
Jobs and Skills Councils, work with State and Territory Governments, peak Jobs and Skills Councils (JSCs) consider occupational skills
bodies, experts, employers, employment service providers, and other key requirements, as part of their workforce planning function, to
stakeholders to develop sector-level guidance on the skills requirements of support training product development and qualification design.
individual roles. This guidance should support better-targeted recruitment The development of sector-level guidance on skills
focused on skills requirements over qualifications requirements of individual roles is in line with these
expectations, subject to JSCs’ priorities and other activities.
28
APPENDIX A: SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS and RESPONSES
Recommendation Response
Recommendation 1 Supports
The Committee recommends the Australian Government work with State and Territory Governments and key stakeholders such as the National Centre for Vocational
Education Research to improve data collection and reporting mechanisms in the vocational education and training sector. This should include a focus on the diversity of
pathways within the sector and on better understanding the complex barriers faced by students.
Recommendation 2 Notes
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government enhance the functions of the National Careers Institute (NCI) to ensure the NCI is able to operate as a single,
trusted source of information on education, training, and careers. The primary focus of the NCI should be supporting key influencers such as teachers, employment service
providers, and career educators. This should include but should not be limited to the following measures:
• Overhaul the Your Career website and replace it with a new online portal which provides accurate, relevant, and current information on courses, qualifications, and
career pathways. This should include measures to:
o enable the NCI to offer additional information on individual training providers and courses;
o ensure that information provided to users is based on the user’s needs and aspirations and does not indicate a ‘default’ preference for courses or qualifications in a
specific tertiary sector; and
o ensure that users can easily navigate online resources.
• In collaboration with Jobs and Skills Australia, the National Centre for Vocational Education Research, and the Jobs and Skills Councils, identifying and addressing future
skills needs and actively promoting careers which respond to those needs.
• Ensuring that career educators in schools, Technical and Further Education (TAFE), and employment service providers are aware of the NCI and can use it as a resource
in performing their functions.
• Identifying and addressing duplication in sources of information on careers and vocational education and training at the national, state, and local levels.
• Explore creating a grants funding program to support and enable the expansion of proven, evidence-based local career education programs.
Recommendation 3 Supports in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, via the National Careers Institute, work with State and Territory Governments to boost the capacity of principle
vocational education and training alumni programs, including to develop work plans to underpin proactive outreach to schools, business associations, and employment
bodies.
Recommendation 4 Supports in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State and Territory Governments, the Jobs and Skills Councils, and other key stakeholders to design principle
and deliver national campaigns to promote vocational education and training (VET) pathways and the careers they serve. Campaigns should be promoted at the national,
state, and local levels, and should include material that:
• Is diffused through a variety of media sources, including social media, government websites, and television.
• Is accessible to all audiences.
• Is adapted—insofar as possible—to local areas and labour markets, with a view to highlighting the value of VET to local communities.
• Targets different entry pathways to VET, including post-secondary pathways and pathways for adult learners.
• Showcases the benefits of the apprenticeship and traineeship pathways.
29
• Targets diverse cohorts, with a focus on improving perceptions for women, First Nations peoples, and people from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds.
• Showcases positive experiences with VET and examples of success among VET graduates.
• Showcases a variety of career opportunities enabled by the VET sector, with a focus on in-demand industries and potential areas of skills shortage.
Campaigns should be underpinned by robust monitoring and evaluation processes to ensure their impact can be measured and to inform and refine future marketing
initiatives.
Recommendation 5 Notes
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, via the National Careers Institute, work with State and Territory Governments to support and incentivise
schools to promote vocational education and training (VET) to students and parents, including promoting VET and university as equally legitimate and valuable post-
secondary pathways. This should include:
• Actively championing VET in promotional material and information relating to education and training.
• Developing clear, accessible, nationally consistent information resources for use by students, parents, teachers, and other influencers.
• Developing best-practice guidelines for schools to promote VET pathways, informed by consultation with education experts.
• Establishing and raising the profile of student advisory groups and steering committees, including by ensuring that there is a mechanism to capture student views in the
development of state and national education policy.
Recommendation 6 Notes
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State and Territory Governments to examine the impact of the Australian Tertiary Admissions
Ranking (ATAR) framework on the quality and uptake of vocational education and training (VET) pathways in secondary schools, including:
• The extent to which the ATAR and university entrance are used to determine resourcing for schools, with a view to introducing new metrics which value both VET and
university pathways.
• How VET and non-VET subjects contribute to ATAR scores, with a view to removing disincentives in the ATAR framework to students pursuing VET pathways during
secondary school and promoting national consistency in how VET subjects are treated within that framework.
Recommendation 7 Supports
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State and Territory Governments to champion examples of education and career success which are
not linked to the Australian Tertiary Admissions Ranking or to a university pathway.
Recommendation 8 Notes
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government review entry pathways into vocational education and training (VET) and university, with a view to developing a
measure of success which can be used to support entry into both sectors. This should include the examination of learner profiles as a potential entry mechanism.
Recommendation 9 Notes
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State and Territory Governments to develop and implement a national strategy for career education
in schools, including the following measures:
• Career education starting in primary school and continuing to the end of secondary school. Career education should vary by year level, and there should be a minimum
number of contact hours for each student.
• Australian secondary schools have at least one accredited career practitioner.
• Improved professional development for career educators and teachers, including courses which build capacity to work with students from diverse cohorts.
• Nationally consistent and up-to-date career information and resources, including on VET and university study options.
30
• A career education framework at the school level, including plans to:
o appoint a school career leader with the function of coordinating careers education—including to ensure that all teachers are equipped to provide career advice if
needed; and
o engage with students and parents on career planning, including to inform parents about potential VET and university pathways; and
• Measures to build closer connections with and increase students’ exposure to VET-related industries.
The National Career Institute, Jobs and Skills Australia, and the Jobs and Skills Councils should be actively involved in the development and implementation of the strategy.
The strategy should be developed in close consultation with professional bodies such as the Career Industry Council of Australia, academic, policy, and education experts,
teachers and students, sector regulators, and other key stakeholders.
Recommendation 10 Supports in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State and Territory Governments to enhance the quality and consistency of vocational education and Principle
training delivered to secondary school students (VETDSSS). This should include the following key measures:
• Establish cooperative arrangements between secondary schools, technical and further education (TAFE) institutes, and industry to underpin the design and delivery of
VETDSSS. Key priorities for these partnerships should include:
o overcoming barriers to the delivery of VETDSSS through TAFEs;
o better integrating VET courses with the broader school curriculum, underpinned by an understanding that VETDSSS should not, in principle, be different to
‘mainstream’ VET;
o encouraging and enabling industry to offer meaningful work experience to VETDSSS students, where appropriate; and
o ensuring that VETDSSS courses are responsive to industry needs.
• Provide targeted investment for schools to deliver VETDSSS, with funding conditional on schools delivering VETDSSS in partnership with TAFEs.
• Ensure that all VETDSSS courses can lead to or be counted towards a nationally recognised qualification.
Recommendation 11 Supports in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State and Territory Governments, education experts and the vocational education and training (VET) Principle
and university sectors to implement the following measures:
• Additional initial teacher education (ITE) programs with a VET speciality.
• Additional ITE programs which focus on enabling industry experts to become qualified VET delivered to secondary school students (VETDSSS) educators, including ‘fast
track’ programs where appropriate.
• Adding units on VET into all ITE courses, to ensure all teachers are able to provide reliable, accurate information on VET to their students.
Recommendation 12 Supports
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State and Territory Governments to ensure that all Australian schools are funded to 100 per cent of
the Schooling Resourcing Standard.
Recommendation 13 Supports in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State and Territory Governments, education experts, and other stakeholders to streamline the Principle
process of developing and accrediting vocational education and training qualifications. This should include:
• Setting a pathway for technical and further education (TAFE) institutes to self-accredit courses and qualifications, supported by robust safeguards.
• Allowing minor amendments to training packages to take place at the Jobs and Skills Council level, subject to industry consultation.
31
Recommendation 14 Supports in
The Committee recommends that as part of the ongoing process of qualification and skills reform, the Australian Government review existing training packages to simplify the Principle
training ecosystem and reduce unused, duplicative, or clearly unnecessary products. This should include consideration of occupational profiles as a means of identifying
where full training packages are and are not required, and as a means of enhancing the development of training packages which respond to industry need.
Recommendation 15 Supports
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government ensure the ongoing process of qualification and skills reform support a collaborative approach to the
development of qualifications and units of competency, involving industry, employers, workers, and unions.
Recommendation 16 Notes
The Committee recommends that the Australian Skills Quality Authority (ASQA) work with Jobs and Skills Australia, the Jobs and Skills Councils and other key stakeholders to
develop and implement robust assessment guidelines for use in the vocational education and training sector.
Recommendation 17 Notes
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State and Territory Governments, education experts and other key stakeholders to explore
introducing proficiency-based assessment into the vocational education and training sector.
Recommendation 18 Supports
The Committee recommends the Australian Government expressly recognise and address systemic barriers that hinder participation by women and by gender diverse people
in vocational education and training (VET), with a specific focus on lifting women’s participation in male-dominated industries. This should include but not be limited to:
• Investing in strategies delivered through the VET sector that support women in acquiring skills and entering male-dominated industries.
• Addressing workplace discrimination and gender-based violence and ensuring equitable employment conditions.
• Introducing additional apprenticeship pathways which specifically target women and gender-diverse people.
• Implementing promotional and educational campaigns which challenge gender stereotypes and negative attitudes that perpetuate barriers for both women and men in
non-traditional VET pathways.
Recommendation 19 Supports in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State and Territory Governments, Jobs and Skills Australia, industry participants, and other key Principle
stakeholders to lift and incentivise participation in traditionally female-dominated vocational education and training (VET) areas including fashion and textiles.
Recommendation 20 Supports in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government develop and implement a pilot program for a new, specialised, industry-led network of apprenticeship support Principle
providers to deliver industry-appropriate mentoring and support to apprentices and trainees. This should include tailored assistance for apprentices and trainees from
disadvantaged and underrepresented backgrounds, including women, First Nations peoples, people with disability, and people from culturally and linguistically diverse
backgrounds.
The learnings from this pilot program should be adapted to future design and tender processes for apprenticeship support providers, including the current Australian
Apprenticeship Support Network and Australian Apprenticeship Support Services.
Recommendation 21 Notes
The Committee recommends that as part of the ongoing process of skills reform, the Australian Government explore measures to increase take-home wages for apprentices
and trainees. This should include consideration of measures to ensure gender pay equity in apprenticeships and traineeships so far as this is possible.
32
Recommendation 22 Supports in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State and Territory Governments to explore measures to increase consistency across jurisdictions as Principle
to the qualifications that are offered as apprenticeships. This should include consideration of expanding apprenticeships to new sectors and industries where this is
warranted.
Recommendation 23 Notes
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State and Territory Governments, Jobs and Skills Australia, academic and policy experts, and the
vocational education and training (VET) and university sectors to design and implement a national policy framework for micro-credentials, including the following key
elements:
• A clear definition of a ‘micro-credential’ to inform policy decisions.
• A clear default principle that micro-credentials cannot be undertaken in lieu of full qualifications and cannot, on their own, ‘stack’ into full qualifications.
• Clear guidance on the circumstances in which micro-credentials can be recognised as credit towards full qualifications—for example where a person is seeking to
transition to another industry or return to the workforce.
• Clear guidance on the circumstances in which government funding will be available in relation to micro-credentials, including that:
o as a default principle, micro-credentials only receive Commonwealth funding where they are portable and targeted to identified areas of skills shortage, and where
the student already possesses a full VET or university qualification; and
o micro-credentials which relate to occupational licensing or other job-specific requirements should typically be funded by the employer or the individual, with
exceptions made for people in financial hardship.
Recommendation 24 Supports in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government expedite the development and implementation of the vocational education and training (VET) Workforce Principle
Blueprint, and ensure the Blueprint considers measures to:
• Lift pay and conditions for VET educators, including measures to reduce short-term and casual contracts and make the sector attractive to trainers of all genders and
backgrounds. This should include consideration of ring-fenced funding for Technical and Further Education (TAFE) to underpin more competitive pay and conditions.
• Enable various entry pathways to the teaching workforce, including pathways which encourage entrants with significant experience in industry and with advanced
qualifications. This should include exploring measures to allow people who do not hold a specialised VET teaching qualification such as the Certificate IV in Training and
Assessment (TAE) enter the teaching workforce.
• Reduce cost and red tape associated with completing the TAE. This should include consideration of fully subsidising the TAE and of expanding fast-track pathways such
as the ‘Pay to Learn’ program.
• Ensure educators are able to provide a supportive learning environment for students. This should include consideration of including units on culturally competent and
trauma-informed pedagogy in qualifications for VET educators; and ensure that reliable, accurate data on the teaching workforce is gathered to enable continuous
improvement.
• Enhance the capacity and expertise of the VET workforce to apply an intersectional lens and analysis across VET policies, programs, and initiatives, with particular
reference to barriers facing women.
Recommendation 25 Notes
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government ensure that the ongoing process of skills reform include measures to encourage and support partnerships
between technical and further education (TAFE) institutes and high-performing not-for-profit and industry-led providers.
33
Recommendation 26 Notes
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State and Territory Governments to explore options to separate vocational education and training
(VET) into ‘education’ and ‘training’, including funding and governance arrangements to support high-performing independent providers to deliver shorter and industry-
specific courses and to prioritise the delivery of longer courses and qualifications through technical and further education (TAFE) institutes.
Recommendation 27 Supports
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State and Territory Governments and with the Australian Skills Quality Authority (ASQA) to rationalise
and improve regulation in the vocational education and training (VET) sector, including by better targeting regulatory and compliance action to deliberately or persistently
noncompliant providers. This should include the following key measures:
• The removal of duplicative administrative and reporting requirements.
• Giving ASQA greater flexibility in terms of how it prioritises, considers, and makes decisions in relation to applications for regulation.
• Strengthening registration requirements to prevent providers from changing the scope of their registration whether they have been operating for less than two years.
• Providing that a provider’s registration automatically lapses when that provider has not delivered training or assessment for a period of 12 months.
• Resourcing and supporting ASQA to focus its regulatory approach on lifting the quality of training in the sector, enhancing VET student outcomes, and building and
maintaining a culture of continuous learning and improvement.
Recommendation 28 Notes
The Committee recommends that as part of the ongoing process of skills reform, the Australian Government work with State and Territory Governments and with the
vocational education and training (VET) sector to:
• Explore aligning fees and subsidy amounts for VET qualifications insofar as this is possible.
• Review the VET Student Loans (VSL) scheme and investigate its relationship with Fee-Free TAFE.
Recommendation 29 Notes
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State and Territory Governments to ensure that the lived experiences of individuals involved with or
impacted by the vocational education and training (VET) sector are prioritised in advisory and governance mechanisms.
Recommendation 30 Supports
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State and Territory Governments to:
• Continue to upgrade and modernise facilities on technical and further education (TAFE) institute campuses, including to ensure that physical and digital spaces are
accessible for students with disability.
• Improve key support services on TAFE campuses, and ensure that students have access to counselling, career advice, legal services, health services, and disability
support.
• Establish robust mechanisms for student and staff representation.
Recommendation 31 Supports in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State and Territory Governments and the sector to increase engagement by technical and further Principle
education (TAFE) institutes with students early in their training pathway, to ensure students fully understand the demands of the qualification and can make informed
decisions about their training and career pathway. This should involve the development of tools to assess students’ aptitude for the units and qualifications they are looking
to pursue and supporting tailored advice.
34
Recommendation 32 Supports
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government ensure that the skills reform agenda includes specific measures to boost access to vocational education and
training for people in regional, rural, and remote areas, informed by local skills need.
Recommendation 33 Supports in
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government implement the recommendations of the Australian Universities Accord Final Report, and work with State and Principle
Territory Governments and other key stakeholders to define a roadmap to a genuinely integrated tertiary education system. This roadmap should include the following key
elements:
• Integrated funding arrangements which support lifelong learning.
• Clearly defined guidelines for the qualifications that can be offered by vocational education and training (VET) providers and by universities.
• Clearly defined guidelines and targeted funding for dual qualifications which align with current and emerging skills needs, including advanced apprenticeships.
• Clear pathways between VET and university courses and qualifications, with defined entry points and processes for credit transfer.
• An adaptive, user-friendly framework for the recognition of prior learning.
• Service-level agreements between the regulators responsible for the VET and university sectors to reduce duplication and streamline process.
The development of the roadmap should be led by a coordinating council, with representatives from Commonwealth and State Government, and from both the VET and
university sectors.
Recommendation 34 Notes
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, through the Jobs and Skills Councils, work with State and Territory Governments, peak bodies, experts,
employers, employment service providers, and other key stakeholders to develop sector-level guidance on the skills requirements of individual roles. This guidance should
support better-targeted recruitment focused on skills requirements over qualifications.
35
