Australian Government response to the
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs
Legislation Committee report:
Whistleblower Protection Authority Bill
2025
2026
The Australian Government thanks the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation
Committee for its report into the Whistleblower Protection Authority Bill 2025 (Committee
Report) tabled on 29 August 2025 and welcomes the opportunity to respond.
Whistleblower protections play an important role in promoting the integrity of both public
and private institutions. They support the maintenance of public trust and confidence in those
institutions by helping bring to light allegations of wrongdoing.
Whistleblower protections are provided for under a range of Commonwealth legislative
schemes, including the Commonwealth public sector whistleblowing framework in the
Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013 (PID Act) and the tax and corporate whistleblowing
frameworks in the Taxation Administration Act 1953 and the Corporations Act 2001.
Public sector whistleblower reform
The Australian Government is committed to delivering strong, effective and accessible
protections for public sector whistleblowers through staged reform of the PID Act.
In 2023 the government delivered stage 1 priority reforms to the PID Act through the Public
Interest Disclosure Amendment (Review) Act 2023. Stage 1 ensured immediate improvements
to the public sector whistleblower framework were in place for commencement of the
National Anti-Corruption Commission on 1 July 2023 and implemented 21 of the 33
recommendations of the 2016 Review of the PID Act by Mr Philip Moss AM (Moss Review).
Stage 1 amendments to the PID Act:
• strengthened protections for disclosers and witnesses
• focused the framework on integrity-related wrongdoing
• made the framework easier to administer, and
• enhanced oversight of the framework by the Commonwealth Ombudsman and the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security (IGIS).
The Australian Government has committed to a second stage of reforms to improve the
accessibility, operation and administration of the public sector whistleblowing framework
in the PID Act.
An exposure draft Public Interest Amendment (Whistleblower Protections) Bill was released
for public consultation from 10 September 2025 to 1 October 2025. The Attorney-General's
Department also undertook targeted consultation on the exposure draft legislation with
representatives from civil society, the legal profession and Commonwealth agencies.
The Whistleblower Protections Bill would:
• establish a new Whistleblower Ombudsman within the Office of the Commonwealth
Ombudsman
• clarify and strengthen protections and supports for disclosers who act within the PID
framework, and
• improve the operation of the PID Act by ensuring that rights, obligations and
procedures are clear and accessible.
2
The creation of the Whistleblower Ombudsman would be the most significant addition to the
federal integrity landscape since the establishment of the National Anti-Corruption
Commission. It would provide strong oversight of the PID Act to ensure disclosures are being
made and responded to appropriately.
The exposure draft Bill was informed by evidence given to this inquiry and other related
parliamentary inquiries, as well as the Moss Review, the outcomes of public consultation
undertaken in late 2023, and close engagement with the offices of the Ombudsman and the
IGIS and other Commonwealth agencies.
Review of the Tax and Corporate whistleblowing framework
The Treasury is currently conducting a statutory review into Australia’s tax and corporate
whistleblowing frameworks. The review will investigate whether the current laws are
working as intended, identify any ongoing concerns, and where appropriate make
recommendations for further improvement.
The tax and corporate whistleblowing frameworks provide protection to whistleblowers who
come forward with information about misconduct or wrongdoing in the tax, corporate and
financial sectors in Australia.
The Review follows amendments in 2019 which established a new tax whistleblowing regime
in the Taxation Administration Act 1953 and strengthened corporate and financial services
sector whistleblowing regimes in the Corporations Act 2001.
The Treasury is planning to undertake consultation as part of its review. It will consider the
evidence received by the Committee as part of the statutory review.
3
Recommendation Government Response
Committee Report
1 The committee recommends that the The government agrees with this recommendation.
government consider the evidence received
Evidence received by the Committee was considered in the development of the exposure
during this inquiry as part of the second
draft of the Whistleblower Protections Bill as well as during public consultation on the
stage of reforms to the Public Interest
exposure draft.
Disclosure Act 2013, the statutory review of
the Corporations Act 2001, and the Taxation Evidence received by the Committee will be considered by Treasury in conducting the
Administration Act 1953 frameworks. statutory review of the tax and corporate whistleblowing regimes in Part 9.4AAA of the
Corporations Act 2001 and Part IVD of the Taxation Administration Act 1953.
2 The committee recommends that the Senate The government agrees with this recommendation.
does not pass the Bill.
Additional Recommendations – Dissenting report from Senator David Pocock
1 That the Bill be passed. The government does not agree with this recommendation.
2 Should the Bill not be passed, the The government notes this recommendation.
government establish and properly resource
This recommendation is being considered in the context of implementation of the stage 2
the key functions of the proposed
reforms to the PID Act, including the establishment of a Whistleblower Ombudsman, and
Whistleblower Protection Authority in
will be considered as part of Treasury’s review into the tax and corporate whistleblowing
existing agencies, in particular, practical and
frameworks.
psychological support for whistleblowers,
investigation into detrimental action, and a
scheme to arrange for the provision of legal
advice to whistleblowers.
3 That the government pursue reforms to The government notes this recommendation.
harmonise whistleblower protections at the
Some of the differences between the public and private sector whistleblowing
federal level.
frameworks reflect underlying differences in the operation of the public and private
sector and relevant accountability frameworks.
The government is considering practical reforms to improve consistency across
whistleblowing frameworks in Australia.
4
Recommendation Government Response
Treasury’s review of the tax and corporate whistleblowing frameworks will consider and
seek views on gaps, overlaps and harmonisation with other regimes including the public
sector regime.
4 That the government explore the The government does not agree with this recommendation in relation to the public sector
introduction of a rewards scheme for whistleblower framework.
whistleblowers, modelled on the successful
A whistleblower rewards scheme is not appropriate for the public sector. Providing for
programs in the United States, where
rewards may create an expectation that the reporting of wrongdoing requires a financial
billions of dollars in penalties have been
incentive rather than being a duty of public officials. A rewards system could create
recovered through incentivised disclosures.
perverse incentives as to the type of misconduct that is reported, with greater focus on
reporting misconduct that carries financial implications.
Treasury’s review of the tax and corporate whistleblowing regimes will consider the
merits and appropriateness of reward schemes in the context of each regime that is
subject to the review.
5 That the government pass reforms to the The government notes this recommendation.
Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013 as a
The government is currently progressing stage 2 reforms to the PID Act and has released
matter of urgency, broadening the scope of
an exposure draft Bill that would improve the accessibility of protections for reprisal .
protected disclosers to fill gaps in the
context of public and private sector overlap,
and improving accessibility of the
protections for whistleblowers who suffer
retaliation.
6 That the Department of the Treasury The government notes this recommendation.
consider the need for a Whistleblower
As part of the statutory review, Treasury will consider whether current assistance,
Protection Authority as part of the upcoming
guidance and protections available to tax and corporate whistleblowers are adequate and
review of the Corporations Act 2001.
whether existing support mechanisms are effective.
5
