OFF I CIAL
Australian Government response to the
Joint Select Committee on Northern Australia Inquiry:
Northern Australia Workforce Development – First and Final Reports
APRIL 2026
1
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Contents
List of abbreviations used ...................................................................................................... 3
Overview ................................................................................................................................ 4
Background ............................................................................................................................ 4
Key findings of first report .................................................................................................... 4
Key findings of final report.................................................................................................... 4
First Report .............................................................................................................................. 5
Recommendation 1 ................................................................................................................ 6
Recommendation 2 ................................................................................................................ 7
Recommendation 3 ................................................................................................................ 8
Recommendation 4 .............................................................................................................. 11
Recommendation 5 .............................................................................................................. 14
Recommendation 6 .............................................................................................................. 15
Final Report ............................................................................................................................ 17
Recommendation 1 .............................................................................................................. 18
Recommendation 2 .............................................................................................................. 19
Recommendation 3 .............................................................................................................. 20
Recommendation 4 .............................................................................................................. 21
Recommendation 5 .............................................................................................................. 23
Recommendation 6 .............................................................................................................. 24
Recommendation 7 .............................................................................................................. 26
Recommendation 8 .............................................................................................................. 27
Recommendation 9 .............................................................................................................. 28
Recommendation 10 ............................................................................................................ 30
Recommendation 11 ............................................................................................................ 31
2
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
List of abbreviations used
AHNT Aboriginal Housing NT
ABF Australian Border Force
ALG Central Australia Plan Aboriginal Leadership Group
CDP Community Development Program
DAFF Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry
DAMA Designated Area Migration Agreements
DITRDCSA Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development,
Communications, Sports and the Arts
FFR Federal Financial Relations
FFA Federation Funding Agreement
HHMC Housing and Homelessness Ministerial Council
HCA Housing Construction Apprenticeship
HPP Housing Policy Partnership
HSSP Housing Sector Strengthening Plan
JSA Jobs and Skills Australia
KAP Key Apprenticeship Program
MMC Modern Methods of Construction
NCI National Careers Institute
NIAA National Indigenous Australian Agency
NEA New Energy Apprenticeship
NAIF Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility
NAMF Northern Australia Ministerial Forum
ONA Office of Northern Australia
PTM Property and Tenancy Management
RCP Regional Connectivity Program
RTTRC Regional Telecommunications Independent Review Committee
RAES Remote Australia Employment Service
RJED Remote Jobs and Economic Development
SRS Schooling Resource Standard
VET Vocational Education and Training
3
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Overview
Background
Following a referral on 12 October 2022 from the Minister for Northern Australia, the
Hon Madeleine King MP, the Joint Select Committee on Northern Australia (the committee)
inquired into and reported on Northern Australia's workforce development. The committee
has published an issues paper and a first report (published in November 2023) and final
report (published in November 2024) for its inquiry.
The two reports examined the key issues raised in public hearings that the committee heard
are affecting workforce development in Northern Australia, with the first report focusing
particularly on housing. In 2024, the committee held targeted hearings throughout Northern
Australia to identify solutions to issues raised related to social infrastructure, health,
childcare, education, and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander workforce participation. The
final report focused on these key areas affecting workforce development in Northern
Australia.
Key findings of first report
Despite Australia’s dependence on Northern Australia for natural resources, exports and
tourism, Northern Australia faces many social and economic challenges.
Many inquiries looking into the development of Northern Australia acknowledge the
importance of a skilled and available workforce in the region.
The committee received extensive evidence to suggest that housing is the number one issue
affecting workforce development across Northern Australia. A lack of appropriate, affordable
housing is leading to younger people and families leaving Northern Australia, people from
outside the region turning down job offers, and issues with attracting migrants to fill skills
shortages. The housing that does exist in many parts of Northern Australia is not sufficient
for existing residents, let alone the additional workforce needed to fill skills shortages. Severe
overcrowding is affecting the ability of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples to
engage in employment opportunities and education.
Key findings of final report
The final report uses the lens of lived experience in Northern Australia to discuss initiatives
that support workforce development. The report recognises that social, economic and
infrastructural benefits are imperative to attract and retain a skilled workforce and explores
practical solutions to improve these issues. While the report acknowledges the difficulties
that exists, it seeks to build on programs and policies which align workforce needs with
individualised results. Specifically, the report reaffirmed the Australian Government’s
dedication to the region with the release of the Northern Australian Action Plan 2024–2029.
The first and final reports can be found at
https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Joint/Northern_Australia/Work
forceDevelopment.
The government tabled this response on 16/04/2026.
4
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
First Report
5
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends the Australian Government establish a review into the
distribution formula of the Federal Assistance Grants. The review should consider:
• the effectiveness of the current system of distribution;
• whether current distributions are equitable across local government areas, with a focus on
remote and very remote areas;
• the effect of the relative decline in the value of the Grants on the service delivery capacity
of local governments; and
• whether the program is meeting its intended purpose.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
While the Commonwealth provides support to the states and territories for local governments
through the Financial Assistance Grant program, the provision of adequate funding for local
government services remains the exclusive responsibility of states and territories under the
constitution.
The Financial Assistance Grants general purpose component is provided to states and
territories on a per capita basis, and the local road component is distributed according to fixed
historical shares.
The Government is committed to investing in Australia’s regions to create jobs, build
opportunities, and unlock economic growth and productivity, with councils also eligible to
receive Commonwealth funding through allocated programs like Roads to Recovery or apply
for competitive grants such as the Growing Regions program.
6
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends the Australian Government establish a review into current tax
incentives to encourage people to live in Northern Australia. The review should consider:
• the effectiveness of current incentives;
• changes needed to make an incentive-based scheme more equitable and based on current
definitions of remoteness; and
• opportunities to improve the current system to encourage more people to live and work in
remote and very remote parts of Northern Australia.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Productivity Commission undertook a comprehensive study into remote area concessions
and payments, with the final report released in 2020. The study found that there are more
effective policies and programs that address regional and remote needs such as funding of
public services including education and health, provision of infrastructure and natural disaster
recovery funding. These policies and programs are funded by all levels of government.
7
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends the Australian Government, in conjunction with the state and
territory governments for Northern Australia, consider ways to provide incentives for
appropriate modular homes to be built to address the immediate housing crisis in Northern
Australia.
The Australian Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
Workforce and housing are interconnected and were the most significant issues that emerged
during the workforce inquiry consultations. Addressing the lack of housing stock is a priority
and central to delivering the government’s vision in the north. This includes overcrowding,
which, as well as contributing to adverse health outcomes, is having a detrimental effect on
the ability for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples to engage in the workforce.
The Australian Government continues to work with states and territories through several
ministerial councils, including the Housing and Homelessness Ministerial Council (HHMC) and
Council of Federal Financial Relations (CFFR), to monitor the progress of the delivery of the 1.2
million homes target under the National Housing Accord. This includes exploring opportunities
to collaborate on initiatives to improve housing supply across Australia, such as through modern
methods of construction (MMC), including modular and prefabricated construction. Benefits of
MMC can include practicality for remote locations, accelerated timelines, cost efficiencies
for scalable projects, reduced environmental impacts due to less material waste, and
addressing labour shortages and improved safety due to requiring less labour-intensive
construction methods. This may assist in meeting Closing the Gap Target 9a1 through
increased supply of housing. MMC may unlock new business and economic opportunities for
First Nations people through Aboriginal economic partnerships. At the 17 December 2024
HHMC meeting, Ministers reaffirmed their collective commitment to close collaboration on
programs that will expedite the delivery of additional housing.
The Australian Government is committed to unlocking the potential of MMC to address
Australia’s housing challenges with speed and efficiency. This includes:
• working with the Australian Building Codes Board to publish a handbook on using MMC
safely, sustainably and in compliance with the National Construction Code;
• investing $4.7 million to develop a voluntary national certification scheme for
prefabricated and modular housing manufacturers;
• supporting state and territory governments through a $49.3 million investment to
accelerate the uptake of modern housing construction methods;
• incentivising state and territory governments through $120 million from the National
Productivity Fund to ensure MMC methods are regulated consistently with conventional
construction; and
• addressing barriers to financing MMC by bringing together some of the nation’s largest
banks, superannuation funds and other institutional investors at the Treasurer’s Investors
Roundtable in November 2024, where it was agreed to work together with industry to address
barriers to financing MMC at scale. Following the investor roundtable, the first ‘prefab
1 Closing the Gap, Closing the Gap Targets and Outcomes, Australian Government, n.d.
8
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
finance’ product was launched in 2025 which made build loans available during offsite
construction.
For Northern Australia more broadly:
• The Northern Australia Action Plan 2024–20292 area of continued focus 7 further commits
the Australian Government to raising awareness of the specific circumstances and needs of
Northern Australia in policy initiatives and investments in housing.
• The Northern Australia Ministerial Forum (NAMF), comprising the Minister for Northern
Australia, the Minister for Indigenous Australians and Ministers from Queensland,
Western Australia and Northern Territory governments with responsibility for regional
development, identified housing affordability and availability in Northern Australia as a
high priority. The NAMF established a senior-officials working group to investigate
policy, capability or other impediments to the progress of housing development in the
north. The Northern Australia Housing Working Group reported its findings to the
NAMF at October 2025 meeting.
• In 2025, the Government agreed to extend the Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility
(NAIF) investment period by a further 10 years to 30 June 2036.
• In 2024, the NAIF supported its first community housing project in the Cairns suburb of
Woree. The NAIF, ANZ and Housing Australia are working with the Queensland
Government to support the delivery of 490 homes with all homes prefabricated and made
in Australia. The complex will include 245 social, 223 affordable and 22 specialist
disability apartments; construction is scheduled to be completed by the end of 2026.
NAIF and Housing Australia provided long term concessional loans, and Queensland
Government’s Housing Infrastructure Fund provided a 20-year operating subsidy that
guarantees a portion of revenues.
The number one issue constraining Australian builders is a shortage of skilled trades.
Recommendations relating to enabling modular homes and strategy development are
important to address the intersecting attraction and retention challenges, while developing a
local workforce presents an opportunity to train, develop, and maintain a building and
construction workforce. This process needs to be done in consultation with local communities
to ensure that projects are tailored to local conditions.
To address the workforce issues in the construction sector, the government has announced
several initiatives to grow Australia’s construction workforce and boost housing supply. In
response to the Strategic Review of the Australian Apprenticeship Incentive System, the
government introduced the Key Apprenticeship Program (KAP), which provides up to
$10,000 in financial support to eligible apprentices in housing construction occupations.
From 1 January 2026 – 31 December 2026, employers of KAP apprentices are eligible for up
to $5,000 in financial support under the KAP Employer Incentive.
The 2024–25 Budget included 20,000 additional Free TAFE places to boost supply in the
construction industry. This measure includes approximately 5,000 pre-apprenticeship places
designed to give students an experience of working in construction-related trades. The 2024–
2 https://www.infrastructure.gov.au/territories-regions-cities/regional-australia/office-northern-
australia/northern-australia-action-plan-2024-29
9
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
25 Budget also included streamlining skills assessments for around 1,900 potential migrants
from countries with comparable qualifications who want to work in Australia’s housing and
construction industry and prioritising the processing of around 2,600 Trades Recognition
Australia skills assessments in targeted construction occupations. The government has also
since legislated to make Free TAFE an enduring feature of the national vocational education
and training system and will fund 100,000 places a year from 2027.
10
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends the Australian Government develop a Northern Australia
focused Regional Infrastructure Strategy with state, territory and local governments. This
Strategy should focus, as a matter of priority, on how to address skilled labour shortages,
ensure there is a sustainable pipeline of infrastructure, and on building the housing and
construction industry in regional areas.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Northern Australia Action Plan 2024–2029 commits the Australian Government to work
with state and territory governments to understand and address current and future
infrastructure needs and priorities in Northern Australia. Infrastructure and Transport
Ministers actively consult other Ministerial Forums where relevant, such as the Housing and
Homelessness Ministerial Council (HHMC), to inform work underway.
On 21 August 2025, the Australian Government released the refreshed National Freight and
Supply Chain Strategy3, and the National Action Plan. In addition, there is significant work
already underway across all levels of government and the private sector to improve regional
infrastructure systems to address emerging defence, climate adaptation and border force
developments and address skilled labour shortages in Northern Australia.
The 2024 National Defence Strategy (NDS) introduced the concept of National Defence - a
coordinated, whole-of-government and whole-of-nation approach to meet the strategic
challenges Australia faces. National Defence works alongside broader government initiatives
to enhance supply chain resilience, domestic industry capacity and capabilities, workforce,
technological innovation and national resilience. This includes aligning efforts between the
Commonwealth, States, Territories and industry, to secure Australia’s supply chains and
strengthen Australia’s capacity to recover from – and minimise the impact of – supply chain
disruptions.
National resilience and the workforce and skills base are important elements of National
Defence. This includes ensuring that civil society and civil infrastructure can support
Australian Defence Force (ADF) requirements, including our network of northern bases,
roads, railways, ports and telecommunication networks. Industry and supply chain resilience
involves developing and maintaining a stronger defence industrial base with the domestic
capability and capacity to support the ADF during crisis or conflict. Collaboration between
the Australian and Northern Territory Government on dual-use infrastructure, national
logistics, and areas of co-benefit has the potential to bolster Australian national security and
resilience.
On 15 September 2025, the Australian Government released the National Climate Risk
Assessment and National Adaptation Plan. Findings from the Risk Assessment show that
communities across Northern Australia are most at risk to the impacts of climate change, due
to their exposure to current and projected climate hazards such as heat, bushfire and tropical
cyclones, and existing vulnerabilities.
The National Adaptation Plan envisions a future Australia where our communities, economy,
and environment are strong and resilient in the face of climate change. The National
3 https://www.freightaustralia.gov.au/
11
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Adaptation Plan establishes a framework for adapting to the nationally significant, physical
climate risks identified in the National Climate Risk Assessment. It also outlines current action
underway and further measures the Australian Government is developing to support adaptation.
The government also recognises the increasing demand from industry for investment in port
redevelopment and expansion to support an increase in international services, including in
Northern Australia. The Australian Border Force (ABF) civil maritime security activities, in
particular those in Northern Australia, advance and protect Australia’s interests by actively
managing non-military risks to Australia and its maritime domain. The ABF’s ability to
undertake operations in Northern Australia, such as deterring and disrupting maritime people
smuggling and illegal foreign fishing, noting the vast coastline and challenging operating
environment, is dependent on available resources, local infrastructure, and support services.
Over the past 18 months, the ABF’s efforts to address threats to border security have
increased to meet heightened threat levels, including in the Kimberley Marine Park and off
the Northern Territory coastline. The ABF uses assets that require access to infrastructure
services, particularly sea and airport services, as well as housing for officers deployed to
remote locations to counter a range of border-related threats.
It is critical that compliant, fit-for-purpose, and permanent infrastructure, as well as
appropriate border agency staff, are in place at a seaport or airport to provide and support
inbound and outbound border clearance services. This includes securing office
accommodation and staff accommodation amid low vacancies. Where it is not possible to
establish a local workforce, fly-in, fly-out arrangements may need to be used. This type of
arrangement is difficult to maintain longer-term and can be costly for the government. The
ABF works with other agencies and local Indigenous communities in planning for any
operational efforts in Northern Australia and will continue those engagements into the future.
The government supports the use of skilled migration to address skills shortages where no
suitably qualified Australians are available. There are a range of visa products available to
Northern Australia to fill shortages in housing and construction, including State and Territory
nominations, Designated Area Migration Agreements (DAMA), and employer sponsored visas.
DAMAs provide employers with access to skilled and semi-skilled workers in occupations
not available in the standard skilled migration program. They contain a range of concessions
to the standard program which incentivise overseas workers to seek employment in regional
areas. In relation to Northern Australia:
• on 19 March 2025, the government announced the establishment of a third DAMA for the
Northern Territory, to be in effect until 30 June 2030. Through the establishment of this
agreement the government reaffirms its long-term commitment to assist employers in the
Northern Territory to address critical labour shortages.
• on 1 July 2024, the government announced the establishment of a new DAMA for
Western Australia to be in effect for five years. The DAMA covers the entire state of
Western Australia, and is the third state/territory led DAMA to be established following
the Northern Territory and South Australia. Western Australian employers will continue
to be able to access the occupations and concessions of the regional DAMAs that are in
operation in Northern Australia, namely Kimberley and Pilbara. In addition, employers
will now be able to access a broader list of occupations and concessions made available
12
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
for the whole state under the new state DAMA.
• the government has announced a two-year extension to the Far North Queensland
DAMA. The extension is supported by the Queensland Government, who are exploring a
state DAMA for Queensland as part of the Australian Government’s transition towards a
state-led approach to DAMAs. All remaining Northern Australia DAMAs are currently in
effect until 2027, including Townsville, Pilbara and Kimberley.
• the Australian Government’s work to establish a single national market for workers
through National Competition Policy will address skills shortages by removing barriers to
labour mobility. For example, national licensing would allow qualified workers in
occupations like the electrical trades and engineering to move to and work in the NT
without needing to wait for a new licence or pay a new fee.
13
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends the Australian Government, in conjunction with states and
territories, explore options for a Regional Infrastructure Fund – or similar mechanism. Such a
fund could be contributed to by all levels of government, to focus on supporting local
employment in social, residential, commercial and civil construction projects. This fund
would focus more broadly on social infrastructure differing from the Northern Australia
Infrastructure Facility.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Northern Australia Action Plan 2024–2029 outlines the necessity of infrastructure to
unlock growth in Northern Australia. Within policy priority area 2, there are three areas of
continued focus which emphasise the Australian Government’s commitment to developing
the required infrastructure in housing, current and future needs, and environmental
sustainability:
• Area of continued focus 7: raise awareness of the specific circumstances and needs of
Northern Australia in policy initiatives and investments in housing;
• Area of continued focus 8: continue to work with state and territory governments to
understand and address current and future infrastructure needs and priorities in Northern
Australia; and
• Area of continued focus 9: continue to work with jurisdictions and regions to ensure there
are adequate water planning and infrastructure to support a quadruple bottom line of
industry, First Nations people, community and environmental sustainability objectives.
Further, the Australian Government’s NAIF is central to the government’s commitment to
supporting Northern Australia and has invested in a number of social infrastructure projects.
In 2023, the Government updated the NAIF Investment Mandate to ensure its investment
decisions align with the Government’s policy priorities such as social infrastructure including
social and affordable housing. Projects include student accommodation and the Engineering
and Innovation Place (teaching and research facilities) through James Cook University in
Townsville, an education and community precinct in Darwin, which includes a new Charles
Darwin University campus and City Library, and a Seniors Community Housing Project in
Cairns.
14
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends the Australian Government consider ways to fund and support
long-term projects that train and employ local Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
on housing construction and maintenance projects in Northern Australia. This process should
be co-designed with communities to ensure that funding and projects are tailored to local
circumstances.
The Australian Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
The Australian and Northern Territory Governments are jointly investing $4 billion over
10 years (2024-34) in housing in the remote Northern Territory to halve overcrowding and
deliver repairs and maintenance to ensure new and existing housing is appropriately
maintained. The Australian Government has signed a Partnership Agreement with the
Northern Territory Government, the Northern Territory Land Councils and Aboriginal
Housing Northern Territory (AHNT) to embed shared decision making in this $4 billion
investment4.
The Partnership Agreement commits all parties to restoring the principle of self-
determination in Aboriginal communities across the remote housing system and to supporting
Aboriginal employment and business development. Parties will consider and introduce
mechanisms to better leverage remote employment programs and reforms to improve
Aboriginal employment in housing. The Australian Government is providing $1 million to
AHNT over 2 years (from 2024-25 to 2025-26) to support AHNT to develop a plan for a
transition to Community-Controlled NT Housing Model.
The Government has replaced the Community Development Program (CDP), managed by the
National Indigenous Australians Agency (NIAA), with the Remote Jobs and Economic
Development (RJED) program and the Remote Australia Employment Service (RAES). This
replacement was informed by community consultations where the government heard
feedback that a new jobs program and employment service should be planned and led by
community and support more local and long-term sustainable jobs. The RAES operates in
regions to support job seekers with the skills, mentoring and training they need to take up job
opportunities, including those created through the Remote Jobs and Economic Development
(RJED) program. RAES support funding to community projects to ensure the services align
with the needs of local job seekers and creation of employment pathways. Jobs created
through the RJED program already include housing, construction and maintenance jobs, and
many other positions that communities have identified as a need.
The Housing Sector Strengthening Plan (HSSP)5 was created under Priority Reform 2 of the
National Agreement on Closing the Gap. It includes 17 transformative sector strengthening
actions to support and build the First Nations community-controlled housing service sector,
including the workforce. The Government remains committed to working collaboratively
with the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Housing Association and state and
territory community representatives and governments through the Housing Policy Partnership
(HPP) to develop a national implementation approach for the HSSP.
4 https://federalfinancialrelations.gov.au/agreements/northern-territory-remote-housing
5 https://www.closingthegap.gov.au/sites/default/files/2022-08/housing-sector-strengthening-plan.pdf
15
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
The HPP has agreed a Work Plan to progress Outcome 9 of the National Agreement on
Closing the Gap and enhance housing outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people and communities. Outputs identified through the Work Plan align with actions of the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander HSSP.
16
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Final Report
17
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the House of Representatives and the Senate reconstitute a
Joint Standing Committee on Northern Australia in the 48th Parliament.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Joint Standing Committee on Northern Australia for the 48th Parliament was appointed
by a resolution of appointment which was passed by the House of Representatives on 23 July
2025 and the Senate on 24 July 2025.
18
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that the Office of Northern Australia work with the Cooperative
Research Centre for Developing Northern Australia and the Northern Australia Universities
Alliance to collate, analyse and publish data about Northern Australia, and develop a data
collection and implementation plan to assist with policy development.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Northern Australia Action Plan 2024–2029 commits the Australian Government to
partner with research organisations to develop research priorities for the north. The Office of
Northern Australia (ONA) works regularly with the Cooperative Research Centre for
Developing Northern Australia and the Northern Australia Universities Alliance.
In addition, the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development,
Communications, Sports and the Arts (DITRDCSA) launched the Regional Data Hub (the
Hub) in July 2023. The Hub is an interactive website which provides access to a range of
datasets, insights and dashboards available at a number of geographic levels including Local
Government Areas and Statistical Area Level 2 (SA2). Themes are wide ranging and include
data and insights on demography, First Nations, housing, economy, infrastructure,
environment and liveability.
The Hub caters to both novice and experienced data users and includes data on regions across
Australia, including those in Northern Australia. The Hub aims to be an effective online
resource connecting regional Australians to information and data about their communities in
a single, accessible, and searchable location.
19
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the Office of Northern Australia identify and advocate for
funding from available nation building projects where there are demonstrable economic and
social benefits.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The role of the ONA is to influence policy design and provide advice as well as advocate for
sustainable and resilient economic and social benefits for Northern Australia. This is
achieved through key governance mechanisms including the NAMF, the Northern Australia
Working Group, an interdepartmental committee for Northern Australia, and the Indigenous
Reference Group, as well as various stakeholder engagements. The ONA is resourced to
coordinate policy advice within the Department and wider Australian Public Service, and to
provide policy and implementation advice for Cabinet submission consultation processes.
The ONA also coordinates the delivery of the Australian Government’s Northern Australia
Action Plan 2024–2029 which sets the strategic direction for the next stage of investment and
growth in the region. Projects that demonstrate economic and social benefits are key to
Northern Australia becoming an attractive environment for investment, growth and
liveability.
Further, the NAIF is at the heart of ensuring the north capitalises on the opportunities
presented by its significant mineral endowments, and critical minerals opportunities
stemming from the global transition to net zero. NAIF is supporting multiple renewable
energy projects, as well as critical minerals projects which provide material components for
renewable technologies. In 2023, the Minister for Northern Australia announced that NAIF
will earmark $500 million for projects that support the delivery of the Government’s Critical
Minerals Strategy 2023-30. These projects are set to deliver significant benefits to the north
and to the nation as a whole. Every dollar from NAIF’s investment is forecast to return over
$7.64 in public benefit (as at 31 December 2025).
20
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with Northern Australian
state and territory governments to increase the delivery of vocational training in the
secondary school system.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government is working with jurisdictions to increase vocational education
and training (VET) in the secondary school system. Through the Australian Government’s
On-Country Learning measure, as part of the Central Australia Plan, the Northern Territory
Government has used part of the Australian Government’s $40.4 million funding to
implement a range of activities, supporting several focus areas including flexible learning, to
support students in obtaining VET qualifications.
The government has also introduced several initiatives to address the skills and training
needed to support the net zero transformation and deliver a Future Made in Australia. These
initiatives will support the empowerment of First Nations peoples to access education,
training, and employment, as well as support women to achieve flexible, safe, and inclusive
work and training opportunities in male-dominated industries.
The government conducted a Strategic Review of the Australian Apprenticeship Incentive
System, which was published on 24 January 2025. As part of its initial response the
government announced an additional investment of $77.8 million over four years for the
Australian Apprenticeship Incentive System, to rebalance investment towards apprentices and
their employers working in priority occupations, who will be eligible to receive up to $10,000
to assist with the greatest skills shortages.
On 1 July 2025, the Key Apprenticeship Program (KAP) commenced, consisting of two
streams:
• a new Housing Construction Apprenticeship (HCA) stream, to encourage Australian
Apprentices to commence in priority housing construction occupations by providing up to
$10,000 in financial support.
• the existing New Energy Apprenticeship (NEA) stream, which provides the same
financial support for Australian Apprentices and employers of apprentices commencing in
priority clean energy occupations.
From 1 January 2026 – 31 December 2026, employers of KAP apprentices are eligible for up
to $5,000 in financial support under the KAP Employer Incentive. In addition to support
under the KAP, from 1 January 2026 – 31 December 2026, apprentices and employers in
non-KAP priority occupations will be eligible for up to $2,500 in financial support.
The government is working to increase access to vocational education and training by
investing $30.2 million over 5 years (from 2023 to 2029), in partnership with Central
Australian communities, the NIAA and the Northern Territory Government, to co−design and
establish a network of up to7 Remote Training Hubs. The training hubs will provide training
opportunities delivered On−Country and includes funding for wraparound support services
assisting with transport between communities and engaging mentors to help connect learners
with local jobs.
21
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
The government, in partnership with states and territories, is investing over $1.5 billion in
joint funding to deliver over 500,000 Free TAFE and VET places nationwide, reducing cost
barriers and creating pathways into priority industries like early childhood education, health,
construction, agriculture and technology. From 1 January 2023 to 30 September 2025 there
have been Free TAFE enrolments of 3,343 in NT, 131,190 in QLD and 111,057 in WA.
Building a highly skilled workforce requires investment in education and training to ensure
workforce needs are met now and into the future. Targeted investments in early learning,
school education, training, further education and employment pathways are needed to address
this inequity of outcomes. The Australian Government has reached agreement with every
state and territory government to get all government schools on a path to 100 per cent of the
Schooling Resource Standard (SRS) through the Heads of Agreement for the Better and
Fairer Schools Agreement – Full and Fair Funding 2025-2034 and the Bilateral Agreements
under the Better and Fairer Schools Agreement 2025-2034. Under these Agreements, the
Australian Government is lifting its contribution of the SRS for government schools to 25 per
cent by 2034 in every state and the Australian Capital Territory, and 40 per cent in the
Northern Territory by 2029. The additional funding is tied to reforms to improve educational
outcomes for all Australian students, including identification of students who need additional
support at school, evidence-based and targeted supports to help students who fall behind,
greater wellbeing support for learning and engagement, and initiatives to help attract and
retain teachers and school leaders. The Northern Territory Government’s associated bilateral
agreement includes a commitment to implement the recommendations from their Review of
Secondary Education in the Northern Territory, including reforms designed to increase
student engagement and create better education pathways for students, including vocational
education support.
The government has also established 10 Jobs and Skills Councils (JSCs) to provide industry
with a stronger voice to ensure Australia’s VET sector delivers better outcomes for learners
and employers. JSCs provide leadership to address skills and workforce challenges for their
industry, including aligning efforts across industries to improve VET system responsiveness,
building stakeholder confidence and driving high-quality outcomes for the VET sector,
learners and business.
In fulfilling their leadership and stewardship role within the VET system, JSC need to deeply
understand their industry sectors, building strong relationships at the national, urban,
regional, rural and remote levels to garner broad commitment and buy-in to drive reform and
address workforce challenges across Australia.
BuildSkills Australia is the JSC for the ‘built environment’ covering building, construction,
property and water services industry sectors. BuildSkills Australia brings together employers,
unions and governments in a tripartite arrangement to identify skills and workforce needs;
map career pathways across education sectors; develop contemporary VET products; support
collaboration between industry and training providers; and act as a source of intelligence on
issues affecting these industries.
22
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends that the Office of Northern Australia work with relevant
government departments to ensure that training and skill development programs in Northern
Australia are designed in conjunction with local communities and delivered flexibly and
according to local needs.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The role of the ONA is to influence policy design and provide advice as well as advocate for
sustainable and resilient economic and social benefits for Northern Australia. This is done
through its expertise on Northern Australia, with a focus relating to the six policy priority
areas of the Northern Australia Action Plan 2024–2029 (the Action Plan) and advocacy for
the principles of community-led program implementation and place-based interventions.
Workforce training and skills development were ranked as the third highest priority during
stakeholder feedback in the development of the Action Plan. Area of continued focus 13
commits the Australian Government to work with industry and state and territory
governments to support Northern Australia accessing the skilled workforce required for
economic growth. Working with local communities to ensure training and skills development
is key to achieving real results under this area of continued focus.
Further, the Australian Government’s Regional Investment Framework (the Framework)6
guides the government’s approach to the design and delivery of regional initiatives and
prioritises valuing local voices. The Framework coordinates across governments to make
investment work better for the regions, putting people at the centre of decision-making.
Investing in people, through listening to local voices and partnering with communities, and
targeted investment in skills, education, training, and local leadership capacity is a priority of
the Framework. The Framework influences decision-making in Budget processes, drives
meaningful collaboration across and between governments, and embeds data and evidence to
support better outcomes.
The Australian Government is also working in genuine partnership with First Nations
communities to ensure local views are represented in decision making. For example, the
Central Australia Plan Aboriginal Leadership Group (ALG) provides ongoing strategic
advice on the $30.2 million Remote Training Hubs Network, which the ALG initially shaped
to ensure training was being delivered on Country. The ALG gave consideration to
organising training based on community language groups and their specific training needs
while also considering how to reduce the travel burden on remote community members to
access high quality training. This collaborative approach is ensuring initiatives meet
communities’ needs.
6 https://www.infrastructure.gov.au/territories-regions-cities/regional-australia/regional-investment-framework
23
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends that the Office of Northern Australia work closely with the
National Indigenous Australians Agency and other relevant government departments to:
• recover and revive the community jobs and associated work ethic and social capital that
were developed under the former Community Development Employment Program and which
were lost as a result of the abandoning of that program;
• in particular, ensure that the program to replace the Community Development Program
provides for program participants to be paid wages under employment contracts with
community-based employers for stipulated work undertaken (rather than participants being
recipients of a government transfer payment), and that participants be eligible for
superannuation and 'top-up' payments;
• design programs which will empower local Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
communities in Northern Australia to better meet their essential service delivery needs; and
• encourage and support Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities in Northern
Australia to develop innovative and sustainable workforce training and enterprise
development models.
The Australian Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
The ONA works with the NIAA and other relevant departments on initiatives to support First
Nations economic empowerment initiatives. First Nations self-determination and economic
empowerment are central to the Northern Australia Action Plan 2024–2029, and that work is
under way.
The Action Plan commits government to working on economic participation with First
Nations communities to create remote jobs. The ONA continues to work closely with the
Northern Australian Indigenous Reference Group who advises the Australian Government on
northern development, maximising benefits and implementation outcomes for Indigenous
Australians. ONA also engage closely with the NIAA which administers the RJED program,
which is part of replacing the Community Development Program (CDP) (formally Remote
Jobs and Communities Program (RJCP) and Community Development Employment Projects
(CDEP).
The $707 million RJED program is the first stage in meeting the government’s commitment
to replace the CDP and is creating 3,000 jobs over 3 years with good pay and conditions, like
superannuation and leave. The new program commenced on 11 December 2024 with the
opening of the first grant round available to eligible employers to apply for funding to pay for
wages and equipment. The second grant round opened from 4 February to 31 March 2025.
Over 1,450 new jobs have been funded through the first two grant rounds of RJED, providing
fair wages and conditions in remote communities across the country. A third RJED grant
round will be delivered in the first half of 2026.
The design of the RJED program also reflects feedback from consultations with remote
communities that showed people want local jobs that could be part-time, full-time or casual
and be flexible around personal, family and community obligations. Jobs could be to care for
the environment, work in a shop, care for others, grow a small business or other ideas. As
part of each grant round, eligible employers are being encouraged to talk to their community
24
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
(especially job seekers) about what jobs they might want to do and what projects their
community needs. Employers will need to show the government in their grant applications
how the jobs they want funding for are what their community wants and needs.
The second stage of replacing CDP, announced on 13 December 2024, is the new Remote
Australia Employment Service (RAES), which officially replaced the Community
Development Program (CDP) from 1 November 2025. This transition marks a significant
change in how employment support is delivered in remote regions of Australia. The RAES
aims to provide tailored and culturally safe support for job seekers, with a focus on co-
designing community projects that align with local priorities. The RAES will support around
40,000 job seekers across 1,200 communities, offering skills development, mentoring, and
training to find and maintain employment. The service will include approaches to build
foundational skills such as language, literacy, and numeracy, and will invest in provider
capability to deliver higher quality, culturally safe services tailored to remote job seekers.
25
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends that the Australian Government:
• extend and maintain the Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility for the foreseeable future
beyond its currently scheduled wind-up date of 30 June 2026;
• change the current $10 million threshold for loans, so that smaller concessional loans can be
made to meritorious applicants; and
• consider updating Northern Australia Infrastructure Facility lending criteria to emphasise
and support viable projects developed to establish Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
commercial enterprises and initiatives.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
An Independent Panel recently undertook a statutory review of the Northern Australia
Infrastructure Facility Act 2016. The Review’s Terms of Reference required consideration of
whether the NAIF’s investment window should be extended beyond 30 June 2026, and the
appropriate governance arrangements beyond this date. The review was tabled in Parliament
on 27 August 2025.
Following the release of the review, in the 2025-26 Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook
(MYEFO), the Government agreed to extend the NAIF investment period by a further 10
years to 30 June 2036.
For smaller concessional loans, the NAIF is contributing up to $50 million to the Northern
Territory Government for the Territory Growth Initiative (TGI). This initiative provides
access to financial support for eligible high-growth potential businesses, to help establish or
expand operations and for projects that may not otherwise be able to readily access capital in
the Northern Territory. Loans may be offered for amounts up to $10 million with no
minimum, for terms of up to 10 years, provided specific conditions are met.
The Australian Government's Northern Australia Action Plan 2024–2029 (the Action Plan)
includes infrastructure to unlock growth as a policy priority area, focusing on housing, roads,
aviation, ports, water, and digital connectivity. The Action Plan commits the Australian
Government to continue to work with state and territory governments to understand and
address current and future infrastructure needs and priorities for Northern Australia.
26
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Recommendation 8
The committee recommends that the Australian Government develop a Northern Australia
Ports Strategy to identify opportunities to stimulate economic growth and leverage existing
government investments.
The Australian Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
As an island nation, Australia is reliant on shipping. With 99 per cent of imports and exports
by volume transported via shipping, ports are essential to the country’s economic growth,
productivity and resilience. Sea ports are complex, with a range of players in port operation
and port regulation. It is often the case that ports are corporatised state government entities,
and states and territories, through legislation, are responsible for land use planning and
controls for the ports, their adjacent land areas, and connecting transport systems.
Ports develop master plans to provide a strategic framework for managing growth, to address
operational needs, and ensure long-term sustainability. Ports often align their plans with
regional, national or global priorities for trade, logistics and development.
While port master plans are typically developed at the state, territory or local level, the
Australian Government has a more limited role as a policy maker, regulator and potential
investment partner in long-term planning of Australia’s port network.
Ports are one part of the interconnected national supply chain and play an important role in
facilitating trade and economic growth across the country, including in Northern Australia where
land transport networks are often prone to natural disasters or extreme weather events. The
updated National Freight and Supply Chain Strategy7 was released in 2025 and sets an agenda for
integrated national action across all freight modes. The strategy commits to delivering nationally
significant actions to stimulate economic growth, promote productivity, and build resilience.
Separate to legislative requirements, DITRDCSA administers the New and Redeveloping
International Ports Framework (the Framework) in consultation with ABF, Department of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry (DAFF), and other relevant agencies. Port operators
seeking to introduce international services for the first time, or where there is a significant
expansion of an existing business model, apply to DITRDSCA to seek consideration from the
Australian Government as to whether their development or increased operations are in the
national interest. The national interest assessment undertaken by DITRDSCA ensures major
port developments align with Australia’s broader strategic, economic and security interests.
Alongside other considerations, the Framework canvasses the potential availability of border
services (biosecurity, immigration and customs control).
DITRDCSA is currently undertaking a review of the Framework in response to the
Aviation White Paper (Initiative 54). This will assist the Australian Government to consider
appropriate future arrangements for whole-of-government consideration of new and
redeveloping ports to support effective planning, resourcing and stakeholder engagement,
while maintaining security and biosecurity standards. These considerations include port
operations in the north and will consider the need for economic growth balanced alongside
the efficient and secure movement of passengers and goods across Australia’s border.
7 https://www.freightaustralia.gov.au/
27
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Recommendation 9
The committee recommends that the Australian Government commit further funding for
improving telecommunications infrastructure in Northern Australia.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government is committed to improving telecommunications, including
delivering faster and more reliable internet through upgrades to the NBN. The Australian
Government is providing an equity investment of up to $3 billion from 2024-25 to upgrade
over 600,000 premises still serviced by the Fibre-to-the-Node network. This investment
builds on the $2.4 billion equity investment provided over four years from 2022-23 to
upgrade 1.5 million premises to full fibre, which were completed in December 2025 on
schedule and within budget.
These investments in NBN upgrades will support more than 94 per cent of Australia’s fixed
line footprint to have access to gigabit speeds by 2030. Within Northern Australia, around
127,000 premises can now order a gigabit-capable service as part of the 1.5 million premises
upgrade program and a further 53,700 premises in Northern Australia will be upgraded as
part of the final upgrade program.
To better enhance regional connectivity, including in Northern Australia funding under the
Better Connectivity Plan for Regional and Rural Australia is providing $1.1 billion to
regional and rural communities. The Plan also includes funding for place-based and mobile
telecommunications infrastructure improvements and has provided $480 million to the NBN
Fixed Wireless and Satellite Upgrade Program which has improved services over these
networks.
The Regional Connectivity Program (RCP) has committed up to $153.3 million for
108 ‘place-based’ telecommunications infrastructure projects in Northern Australia across
three rounds of RCP to improve digital connectivity across regional, rural and remote
Australia. This includes $69.6 million dedicated to34 projects under RCP Round 2 in
Northern Australia.
Other government investments in telecommunications infrastructure include:
• $71.6 million investment in the Mobile Black Spot Program to improve
telecommunications infrastructure, mobile coverage and competition across Australia, for
242 mobile base stations across Northern Australia.
• $15.8 million over 3 years to 30 June 2025 to maintain and upgrade telecommunications
infrastructure in approximately 457 small remote First Nations communities in the NT,
Qld, WA and SA through the Remote Indigenous Communities Telecommunications
program.
• $6.7 million investment in 156 projects under the Mobile Network Hardening Program to
strengthen resilience to harden mobile telecommunications infrastructure to ensure
communities can continue to access services during and after disasters. Round 3 is
funding infrastructure in regional, remote and peri-urban Australia at risk of, or impacted
by, natural disasters.
28
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
• $3.3 million investment in four projects under the Peri-Urban Mobile Program to improve
mobile connectivity in bushfire and other natural disaster-prone areas along the edge of
Australia’s major cities.
• $9.6 million expended over three years to 30 June 2025 to improve digital connectivity
via Wi-Fi installations and Digital Kiosks in 30 communities (including 4 Town Camps)
in regional and remote locations across the Northern Territory.
The Australian Government recognises the importance of improving connectivity for First
Nations Australians, including those living in remote communities across Northern Australia.
Enhancing digital connectivity for First Nations peoples supports Closing the Gap Target 17:
By 2026, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have equal levels of digital inclusion.
In the 2024–25 Budget, the government announced $68 million to support First Nations
digital inclusion, including for the rollout of community Wi-Fi in partnership with NBN Co
and through an open competitive grant program. The NBN Community Wi-Fi services have
now been activated and will benefit a number of communities in Northern Australia,
including Galiwin’ku, Arawerr, Areyonga, Ampilatwatja, Wandawuy, Gan Gan, Mungkarta,
Doomadgee, Kowanyama, Pormpuraaw, Hope Vale, Kurangjo/Kurnagki, Loanbun, Mindi
Rardi, Bungtardi/Bungardi, Burawa, Darlngunaya and Junjuwa.
The Australian Government committed $2.5 million over 5 years for the First Nations Digital
Inclusion Advisory Group to provide strategic advice to the Minister for Communications on
issues relating to digital inclusion for First Nations people. The First Nations Digital
Inclusion Advisory Group has engaged with the Northern Australia Indigenous Reference
Group on the importance of digital inclusion as an enabler of access to information and
services for First Nations Australians living in Northern Australia, particularly in remote
communities. The First Nations Digital Inclusion Roadmap provides practical
recommendations for government and industry to support progress towards Target 17 of the
National Agreement on Closing the Gap.
The Government’s response to the Regional Telecommunications Independent Review
Committee (RTIRC) 2024 report was tabled on 18 September 2025. The response welcomed
the Review, articulated the Government’s ongoing commitment to strengthening regional
connectivity and that progress has already been made. The response noted the RTIRC’s
findings are informing policies and programs to improve connectivity in rural, remote, and
regional areas. Recommendation 9, support for the First Nations Digital Inclusion Advisory
Group, and recommendation 10, embedding community Wi-Fi, from the RTIRC’s report
intersect with the above recommendation.
29
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Recommendation 10
The committee recommends that the Australian Government adequately resource the Office
of Northern Australia to:
• closely monitor progress in relation to the recovery and revival of community jobs and the
associated work ethic and social capital that were developed under the former Community
Development Employment Program, and which were lost as a result of the abandoning of that
program;
• evaluate what other policy initiatives to improve social infrastructure have worked in the past;
• focus on initiatives to improve social infrastructure in Northern Australia going forward; and
• ensure that future policy initiatives are evaluated in terms of their effectiveness, with clear
key performance indicators and evaluation dates
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The ONA works closely with the NIAA and other relevant departments on initiatives to
support First Nations economic empowerment initiatives. This includes the RJED, which is
administered by NIAA, and has been designed to take the positives of previous employment
programs (like the Community Development Employment Program). The ONA and the
Northern Australia Indigenous Reference Group have worked closely with NIAA in the
development of the RJED and will continue to work with NIAA. Monitoring the progress and
impact of these programs is the responsibility of NIAA.
DITRDCSA administers several grant programs that support social infrastructure. The
Thriving Suburbs Program, Growing Regions Program and the Stronger Communities
Program are providing grants between $2,500 and $15 million to support local government
entities, incorporated not-for-profits, and community organisations.
The ONA’s role is to influence policy design and provide advice to those government
agencies designing and implementing programs delivered in north Australia. This is done
through its expertise on Northern Australia, with a focus relating to the 6 policy priority areas
of the Northern Australia Action Plan 2024–2029 and advocacy for the principles of
community-led program implementation and place-based interventions. The relevant delivery
agencies remain responsible for the progress monitoring and performance evaluation of their
programs.
30
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
OFF I CIAL
Recommendation 11
The committee recommends that the Australian Government, when developing and
implementing measures to address housing shortages in Northern Australia, consider the
provision of suitable housing for both families and people in other situations, including
young, single workers in rural, remote and very remote communities.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian and Northern Territory Governments are jointly investing $4 billion over 10
years from 2024-25 to 2033-34 in remote Northern Territory housing. This investment will be
delivered through a Federation Funding Agreement (FFA) with the Northern Territory
Government and will support significant progress against the National Agreement on Closing
the Gap.
Through the FFA, the Australian and Northern Territory Government have committed to
building up to 270 houses per annum to halve overcrowding over 10 years; and to the
delivery of a comprehensive Property and Tenancy Management (PTM) Program, including
preventative, cyclical and responsive repairs and maintenance to improve housing quality and
liveability.
The Australian Government has also amended the Restoring Funding for Northern Territory
Homelands FFA to provide a further $120 million over 3 years (2024-27) to extend funding
to continue repairing and upgrading housing and essential infrastructure on Northern
Territory Homelands.
This builds upon an initial investment of $100 million in 2022-23 to 2023-24 to support
urgent repairs to existing housing and essential infrastructure and complements the Northern
Territory Government’s investments in Homelands programs.
Housing delivered is informed by the National Indigenous Housing Guide and Liveable
Housing Design Guidelines.
31
OOFFFF II CCIIAALL
