OFFICIAL
Australian Government response to the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and
Security report:
Advisory report on the Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2025
APRIL 2026
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
The Government thanks the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security
(‘Committee’) for its review of the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment
Bill (No. 2) 2025.
The Government provides the following responses to the Committee’s recommendations.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendations
Recommendation 1: The Committee recommends that the Explanatory Memorandum
for the Bill be amended to make clear that ‘adult questioning matters’ as defined in
section 34A of the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979 do not extend
to the carrying out of Australia’s responsibilities to any foreign country in relation to
those matters.
Response:
The Government agrees to this recommendation. The Government will amend the
Explanatory Memorandum to clarify that the new proposed definition of ‘adult questioning
matters’ does not extend to the carrying out of Australia’s responsibilities to any foreign
country in relation to those matters, as is already the intended operation of the Bill.
Recommendation 2: The Committee recommends that the Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security (IGIS) continue to include in its annual report specific
comments on its oversight activity in relation to compulsory questioning warrants; and
that the IGIS brief the Committee on this matter annually as part of the Committee’s
Administration and Expenditure review process.
Response:
The Government agrees to this recommendation. The Government acknowledges the
independent role of the IGIS in providing oversight of Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation’s (ASIO) activities, and notes that existing arrangements provide that the IGIS
brief the Committee on a regular yearly cadence as part of the Committee’s Administration
and Expenditure review process.
Recommendation 3: The Committee recommends that the Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation Act 1979 be amended so that where the prescribed authority
directs the removal of the lawyer of a person subject to a compulsory questioning
warrant, the prescribed authority must provide written advice (subject to clearance by
ASIO for classified information) to the lawyer within a reasonable period specifying the
grounds for the decision.
Response:
The Government agrees in-principle to this recommendation. The Government agrees that,
where the prescribed authority directs that a lawyer for the subject of a questioning warrant
be removed from questioning, the prescribed authority should provide written advice
specifying the grounds for the decision, within a reasonable period.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
The Government proposes to implement this recommendation by amending the written
statement of procedures made under section 34AF of the Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation Act 1979 (Statement of Procedures). The Statement of Procedures sets out
standard operational procedures in relation to the execution of a questioning warrant. The
recommended requirement for advice to be provided closely aligns with complementary
safeguards already contained in the Statement of Procedures.
Recommendation 4: The Committee recommends that section 34AD of the Australian
Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979 be amended to incorporate a tiered
approach to the eligibility requirements for prescribed authorities, under which the
President or Deputy President of the Administrative Review Tribunal, or a King’s
Counsel or Senior Counsel, may only be appointed where no former superior court
judge is available.
Response:
The Government agrees in-principle to this recommendation. The Government agrees to
introduce a tiered approach to the selection of a prescribed authority to oversee questioning
under a warrant. Under this approach, a prescribed authority who is a former superior court
judge will be contacted first to act in the role, before a prescribed authority who is the
President or a Deputy President of the Administrative Review Tribunal or a prescribed
authority who is a Senior Counsel, is contacted to act in the role, respectively. This will
maintain the current appointment process for prescribed authorities, which ensures that a
broader pool of qualified persons, willing and able to act in the role, is retained.
ASIO’s compulsory questioning framework previously provided for a tiered approach to the
appointment of prescribed authorities. The tiered approach to appointment was removed from
the framework in 2020 due to the difficulties it presented. Under the previous approach,
persons who were former judges of a superior court could be appointed as a prescribed
authority. Other categories of persons could be appointed to the role only if there was an
insufficient number of former judges of a superior court available. This approach resulted in a
shortage of suitable candidates available and willing to act as a prescribed authority for an
extended period of time due to the age and tenure of former judges.
To avoid the same issues arising, the Government proposes to implement this
recommendation by amending the Statement of Procedures as this matter is complementary
to other matters already contained in the Statement of Procedures.
Recommendation 5: The Committee recommends that, subject to the recommendations
in this report, the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill (No. 2)
be passed by Parliament.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
OFFICIAL
