Australian Government response to the
Environment and Communications Legislation
Committee report:
Nature Positive (Environment Protection Australia) Bill
2024 [Provisions] and related bills
April 2026
Introduction
The Australian Government thanks the Environment and Communications Legislation
Committee (the Committee) and those individuals and organisations who contributed to the
inquiry on the Nature Positive (Environment Protection Australia) Bill 2024 [Provisions] and
related bills (together referred to herein as the Nature Positive Bills).
The Nature Positive Bills formed Stage 2 of a proposed three-stage package of reforms
intended to address the key recommendations of the Independent Review of the EPBC Act
by Professor Graeme Samuel AC (the Samuel Review). The Bills were withdrawn from
Parliament on 5 February 2025 following commitments by the Prime Minister that the
Government would continue to build on the extensive consultation already undertaken and
revisit environmental law reform during the next term if elected.
A new package of legislation – the Environment Protection Reform Bill 2025 and six related
bills (Environment Protection Reforms) – was introduced to Parliament on 30 October 2025.
The Environment Protection Reforms comprised targeted amendments to the EPBC Act to
deliver three core principles of the Samuel Review: stronger environmental protection and
restoration, more efficient and robust project assessments and greater accountability and
transparency in decision-making. The package included a Bill to establish the statutory
position of the Head of Environment Information Australia (HEIA), and a Bill to deliver on the
Government’s 2025 election commitment to establish the National Environmental Protection
Agency, superseding the key provisions of the Nature Positive Bills.
The Environment Protection Reforms passed the Parliament on 28 November 2025,
delivering on the Government’s commitment to strengthen and streamline Australia’s
national environmental laws. The changes will deliver stronger protections for the
environment, while supporting national productivity, including through projects of national
importance, such as critical minerals, renewable energy and housing. Details of the reforms
are available at https://www.dcceew.gov.au/environment/epbc/epbc-act-reform.
In light of these developments, the Government has noted the recommendations of the
Committee’s report on the Nature Positive Bills.
Nature Positive Bills
The Nature Positive Bills were introduced into Parliament on 29 May 2024. The package
included:
- the Nature Positive (Environment Protection Australia) Bill 2024, which proposed to
establish a statutory agency to be known as Environment Protection Australia, to be
led by a Chief Executive Officer (CEO); and
- The Nature Positive (Environment Law Amendments and Transitional Provisions) Bill
2024 proposes to amend nine environmental laws to provide the CEO with a range of
powers and functions under those laws, and to amend the Environment Protection
and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 to confer compliance powers on the EPA,
introduce protection order and audit powers, and provide for the Minister and
Secretary to delegate powers to the CEO of the EPA; and
- The Nature Positive (Environment Information Australia) Bill 2024 proposed to
establish the Head of Environment Information Australia (EIA) as a statutory officer
within the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water.
On 27 June 2024, the Selection of Bills Committee referred the Nature Positive Bills to the
Committee.
On 9 September 2024, the Committee released its final report. The report included 40
recommendations, 35 of which are contained within dissenting reports from the Coalition,
Australian Greens, Senator David Pocock and Senator Lidia Thorpe.
Environment Protection Reforms
The Environment Protection Reforms were introduced on 30 October 2025.The reform
package included legislation that amends the EPBC Act, establishes a new statutory
agency, known as the National Environmental Protection Agency (National EPA), and
establishes a statutory Head of Environment Information Australia (EIA) and charging
arrangements. The Acts are:
The Environment Protection Reform Act 2025 (Reform Act).
­
The National Environmental Protection Agency Act 2025.
­
The Environment Information Australia Act 2025.
­
A further four Acts that establish a charging framework for restoration charges to
­
support offsets reform and provide for appropriate cost recovery arrangements for
regulatory activities under the EPBC Act.
On 30 October 2025, the Senate referred this package of bills for inquiry and report to the
Committee. The Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water
provided a submission and a supplementary submission to the Senate Inquiry and appeared
at hearings of the inquiry on 14 November 2025 and 27 February 2026. Details of that
inquiry are available at
https://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Environment_and_Co
mmunications/EPRBill48P.
The Government will respond to the Committee’s report on the Environment Protection
Reforms when it is finalised.
Committee recommendations
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the Australian Government undertake further
consultation regarding the definition of 'nature positive' to ensure that it is consistent with
Australia's international commitments, including the Global Biodiversity Framework.
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that the Minister consider measures to encourage the
incorporation of First Nations traditional environmental knowledge into Environment
Information Australia and in particular, in determining the baseline for nature positive, and
in the register of national environmental information assets, with appropriate protections
for Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property and the confidentiality of culturally
sensitive information.
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that amendments be made to the Nature Positive
(Environment Law Amendments and Transitional Provision) Bill 2024 to consider
introducing greater procedural safeguards for the issuing of Environmental Protection
Orders (EPO), including considering requirements for limited merits review, and requiring
the Minister (and subsequently the CEO of the EPA) to disclose the underlying facts that
have led to the issuing and scope of an EPO.
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that amendments be made to the Nature Positive package of
bills to introduce a new National Environmental Standards making power to enable the
Minister to make, review and amend National Environmental Standards as disallowable
legislative instruments.
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends, subject to the other recommendations found in this report,
that the Senate pass the Nature Positive (Environment Protection Australia) Bill 2024, the
Nature Positive (Environment Information Australia) Bill 2024, and the Nature Positive
(Environment Law Amendments and Transitional Provisions) Bill 2024.
Response to Committee recommendations
The Government notes these recommendations.
Coalition Senators’ Recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Coalition recommends that major and far-reaching amendments would need to be
made to these three Bills before they should be passed.
Recommendation 2
The Coalition also recommends that the passage of these three Bills be deferred until
after the finalisation of Labor’s promised wider overhaul of the Environment Protection and
Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999.
Response to Coalition Senators’ Recommendations
The Government notes these recommendations.
Australian Greens’ Recommendations
Recommendation 1
This package of bills is insufficient and fails to protect Australia’s environment. The Senate
should amend this legislation to implement stronger protections for forests, critical habitat
and the climate.
Response to Australian Greens’ Recommendations
The Government notes this recommendation.
Senator David Pocock’s Recommendations
Recommendation 1
Amend Schedule 2 of the Nature Positive (Environment Law Amendments and
Transitional Provisions) Bill 2024 to bring forward amendments to close the loophole
exempting native forest logging from the Environment Protection and Biodiversity
Conservation Act 1999.
Recommendation 2
Amend Schedule 2 of the Nature Positive (Environment Law Amendments and
Transitional Provisions) Bill 2024 to include the following amendments to the Environment
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999: ϒ Repeal the exemption for continuous
uses of land in section 43B of the EPBC Act; and ϒ Add new provisions to compel referral
and assessment of planned deforestation greater than 20 hectares in threatened or
migratory species habitat, a threatened ecological community, or in Great Barrier Reef
catchments, and require the assessment and approval decisions to consider the
cumulative impacts of a native vegetation clearing on each threatened species or listed
MNES impacted.
Recommendation 3
The Nature Positive (Environment Protection Australia) Bill 2024 should be amended to
ensure the independence of the Environment Protection Australia by requiring an
independent governance board. The functions of the Board should include the
appointment of a Chief Executive Officer.
Recommendation 4
The Nature Positive (Environment Protection Australia) Bill 2024 should be amended to
establish clear objectives for the EPA in the exercise of relevant functions, powers or
duties. These objectives must include: to enhance the protection and restoration of
Australia’s environment, and prevent the degradation of the environment and reduce risks
to human health.
Recommendation 5
The Nature Positive (Environment Protection Australia) Bill 2024 should be amended to
set out clear, legislated duties for the EPA. Duties must include a duty to protect the
environment and human health from the harmful effects of pollution, destruction,
degradation and waste, through assessment, enforcement, monitoring, reporting and
standard setting.
Recommendation 6
The Nature Positive (Environment Protection Australia) Bill 2024 should be amended to
increase transparency and accountability by establishing a legislative presumption in
favour of publication of key information and decisions, including delegation of functions
and powers by the Minister to the EPA.
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends that the Minister consider measures to encourage the
incorporation of First Nations traditional environmental knowledge into Environment
Information Australia and in particular, in determining the baseline for nature positive, and
in the register of national environmental information assets, with appropriate protections
for Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property and the confidentiality of culturally
sensitive information.
Recommendation 8
The Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 should be amended
to create a legislated definition of ‘unacceptable impacts’ on a matter of national
environmental significance and a requirement that the Minister cannot approve an action
which will have unacceptable impacts.
Recommendation 9
The impact of climate change on the Australian environment must be captured in national
environment laws. The bills should be amended to include amendments to the
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 requiring full disclosure of
all direct and indirect emissions likely to be caused by projects seeking approval under the
Act, and an explicit requirement to consider the climate impacts of these projects should
be included in the assessment and approval provisions of the Act.
Response to Senator David Pocock’s Recommendations
The Government notes these recommendations.
Senator Lidia Thorpe’s Recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Stage 2 Nature Positive bills should not pass in their current form, and should only be
passed once they are amended in a way that will genuinely improve the health of Country.
Recommendation 2
The Federal Parliament and its committees must fundamentally change their procedures,
practices and policies around consultation to ensure that First Peoples and other
strategically under-represented populations can meaningfully contribute and provide
evidence in an accessible, timely and appropriate manner.
Recommendation 3
The development of all environmental legislation, policies and resourcing arrangements
must include a broad consultation process with First Peoples, their communities and
knowledge-holders on a grassroots level. This must occur in a way that adheres to the
rights and obligations set out in the United Nations Declaration on The Rights of
Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP), including the principles of self-determination and Free,
Prior and Informed Consent.
Recommendation 4
The Federal Government must begin Treaty negotiations with all Sovereign First Peoples
as a matter of urgency to enable all language groups to uphold their cultural authority over
the Country, self-determine their own aspirations and have greater control over decisions
relating to the management of Country.
Recommendation 5
The Federal Government must progress its work program for strengthening protections for
Country and First Peoples’ tangible and intangible cultural heritage as a matter of urgency,
including the establishment of transparent timelines and broad public consultation
processes that allow for appropriate scrutiny and accountability.
Recommendation 6
The Federal Government must implement in full all recommendations from the 2021 A
Way Forward report into the destruction of Juukan Gorge, including the introduction of
new standalone cultural heritage legislation as a matter of urgency. This must include
broad consultation to ensure that cultural heritage laws align with all new environmental
laws, and National Environmental Standards to protect any further destruction of First
Nations tangible and intangible cultural heritage.
Recommendation 7
In accordance with its commitments under the Nature Positive Plan and the
recommendations of the Samuel Review, the Albanese Government must immediately
release the draft National Environmental Standard for First Nations Participation and
Engagement in Decision-Making and engage in a broad consultation process, including
the provision of a clear timeline for development and implementation of the Standard in
this term of government.
Recommendation 8
The Federal Government must ensure that First Peoples’ perspectives and ecological
knowledge is embedded in all environmental policy, practices and approaches to nature
protection, including the Nature Reform package and Environment Protection and
Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999, to prevent the ongoing destruction of First Peoples’
cultural, intangible and tangible heritage. This must include appropriate protections for
culturally sensitive information and Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property, in
recognition of the fact that First Nations knowledge is not a resource to be extracted.
Recommendation 9
First Peoples must have a greater role in decision making about Country, including
strengthening the role of the existing Indigenous Advisory Committee (IAC) by:
• clearly specifying the functions of the IAC in legislation, including tasking it with
overseeing the development, implementation, monitoring and review of the
National Environmental Standard (NES) for First Nations Engagement and
Participation in Decision Making;
• providing that the IAC may provide advice to other statutory decision
• makers and relevant agencies, including the CEO of Environment Protection
Australia (EPA), any advisory body established by the EPA, the Head of
Environment Information Australia (EIA), the Threatened Species Scientific
Committee, and the Australian Heritage Council;
• improving transparency of the IAC’s work, including publication of advice provided
by the IAC to the Minister and other statutory decision-makers; and
• providing for the frequency and procedures of meetings, including publishing of its
agendas and records of meeting minutes on the Department’s website (subject to
non-disclosure of confidential or sensitive matters).
Recommendation 10
Amend the EPA Bill to legislate a ‘board with CEO’ model, with adequate provisions to
ensure a strong and independent EPA and that the CEO carries out their functions
consistently with clear duties and purposes of the EPA.
Recommendation 11
Amend the EPA Bill to legislate Objects of the EPA Act and clear duties on the CEO,
including duties to deliver nature positive outcomes, halt and reverse the decline of listed
threatened species, and adhere to the principles of Free, Prior and Informed Consent in
engaging with First Nations.
Recommendation 12
The Data and Information National Environmental Standard must be prioritised alongside
the First Nations National Environmental Standard and EIA must be legislatively required
to act consistently with these standards to appropriately deal with First Nations knowledge
and protect Indigenous Cultural and Intellectual Property, in accordance with Article 31 of
the UNDRIP.
Recommendation 13
Amend the EIA Bill to insert a definition of nature positive based on the Global Biodiversity
Framework.
Recommendation 14
The Nature Positive baseline should be established as a matter of urgency in the EIA Bill
to avoid Country and cultural heritage being destroyed by any further delays, to be
implemented using the 2021 State of the Environment Report and prioritising areas under
threat due to exploration and expansion, rather than relying on the CEO to establish a
baseline.
Recommendation 15
Amend the EPBC Act to include a strong legislative framework for the development and
implementation of legally binding National Environmental Standards in the form of
disallowable legislative instruments, in accordance with the Government’s commitment
and the recommendations of the Samuel Review. This framework must include:
• a legislated timeline within which priority Standards must be developed, beginning
with the First Nations Engagement and Participation in Decision Making, Data and
Information, and Matters of National Environmental Significance;
• allow for the application of Standards to decisions and function under the EPBC
Act;
• arrangements around the governance, implementation, monitoring and review of
the Standards;
• a non-regression clause so that future Standards cannot weaken existing
Standards; and
• appropriate provisions to take effect in the event that the legislated timeline is not
met.
Recommendation 16
Amend the EPBC Act to strengthen critical habitat protections and provide clear definitions
of unacceptable impacts for each Matter of Environmental Significance.
Recommendation 17
Amend the EPBC Act to repeal the exemption for Regional Forestry Agreements and
ensure the EPBC Act can apply to native forest logging to halt the destruction of our
sacred sites, our totems, and so many threatened forest-dependent species.
Recommendation 18
Amend the EPBC Act to ensure appropriate referral of land clearing for impact
assessment and requirements for the consideration of cumulative impacts in decision-
making under relevant sections of the Act.
Recommendation 19
Repeal the continued use of land exemption at section 43B of the EPBC Act to end the
agricultural sector’s exploitation of this loophole and allow for EPBC regulation of
deforestation in threatened species habitat.
Recommendation 20
Amend the EPBC Act to insert provisions to restrict the use of biodiversity offsets in line
with best practice.
Recommendation 21
The Nature Positive bills must be amended to require explicit consideration of climate
impacts and full emissions contributions of new projects, aligning the legislation with our
climate targets under the Climate Change Act 2022 and the reformed Safeguard
Mechanism.
Recommendation 22
Amend the EPBC Act to expand the existing water trigger to include consideration of the
cultural values of water resources and ensure it applies to carbon capture and storage
projects.
Recommendation 23
The Minister for Environment and Water must use their powers under the EPBC Act to
protect Country by:
• calling in Tamboran and Empire Energy’s gas fracking wells for assessment under the
EPBC water trigger;
• repealing the EPBC approvals for Defence Housing Australia’s unlawful and
destructive development at binybara/Lee Point;
• adequately assessing the Hunter Gas Pipeline, which will have devastating impacts on
Gomeroi Country, including groundwater, biodiversity, and the climate; and
• calling in Adani’s coal mine for review under the EPBC water trigger in light of new
scientific studies revealing the mine’s devastating impacts on water resources.
Response to Senator Lidia Thorpe’s Recommendations
The Government notes these recommendations.
