Attorney-General
Federal Member for Greenway

Reference: MS26-000302

Senator the Hon Sue Lines
President of the Senate
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

thepresident@aph.gov.au

Dear President

I am writing to convey the Government’s response to the Senate Community Affairs References
Committee report on the Indefinite detention of people with cognitive and psychiatric
impairment in Australia, which predates the 47" Parliament.

The Government notes each recommendation of the report. However, given the passage of time
since the report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.

I note that since this report was provided to Government a number of reforms have been
implemented, including the establishment of the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission
which is an independent Australian Government Regulator tasked with regulating the NDIS
including a nationally-consistent approach to promote safe practices and improve the quality and
diversity of providers' services.

I also note that many of the recommendations in this report fall within the responsibility of the
states and territories. While states and territories have primary responsibility for justice systems,
the Australian Government is coordinating a range of measures to ensure a shared commitment
to Targets 10 and 11 of the National Agreement on Closing the Gap including:

e implementing the Nation’s Justice Reinvestment Programs to improve justice outcomes
and address the drivers of contact with the criminal justice system.

e investing $3.9 billion in the National Access to Justice Partnership, which commenced on
1 July 2025, which includes dedicated funding for ATSILS ($837.80 million over 5
years) and Family Violence Prevention and Legal Services ($366.8 million over 5 years).

e working through national mechanisms like the Standing Council of Attorneys-General
(SCAG) and Joint Council on Closing the Gap to pursue practical reforms and increased
accountability in reducing the number of preventable deaths in custody.

The Hon Michelle Rowland MP
PO Box 6022, Parliament House Canberra
Suite 101C, 130 Main Street, Blacktown NSW 2148 | (02) 9671 4780

Please accept this letter as the Government’s response to the Committee’s report. A copy of this
letter has also been provided to Senator Penny Allman-Payne, Chair of the Senate Community
Affairs References Committee.

In the event this letter is received when the Senate is not sitting, I note the presentation of this
document is pursuant to Senate Standing Order 166.

Yours sincerely

Michelle Rowland MP
20 / 4/2026

oe Senator Penny Allman-Payne, Chair, Senate Community Affairs References Committee
