Australian Government response to the
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation
Committee report:
Privacy and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2024
[Provisions]
APRIL 2026
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the opportunity to respond to the Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee’s report, Privacy and Other Legislation
Amendment Bill 2024 [Provisions] (the Report), tabled on 14 November 2024.
The Government thanks individuals and organisations that contributed to the Committee’s
inquiry, including in preparing written submissions and appearing before the Committee.
The Government moved a number of amendments to the Privacy and Other Legislation
Amendment Bill 2024 (the Bill) to implement recommendations of the Report.
The Bill passed the Parliament on 29 November 2024, and received Royal Assent on 10
December 2024.
The Privacy and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2024 makes a range of important
amendments to strengthen privacy protections for Australians. The Act:
• requires the development of a Children’s Online Privacy Code which will apply to
social media and other internet services which are likely to be accessed by children
• enables streamlined information sharing in the case of an emergency or an eligible data
breach, while ensuring that information is appropriately protected
• supports the free flow of information with appropriate protections by providing for
countries and binding schemes with substantially similar data privacy protections to
Australia to be prescribed
• expands the suite of regulator powers and enforcement options available to the
Australian Information Commissioner to effectively protect privacy
• provides individuals with transparency about the use of their personal information in
automated decisions which significantly affect their rights and interests
• establishes a statutory tort for serious invasions of privacy, and
• creates new criminal offences targeting the release of personal data in a manner that is
menacing or harassing – a practice known as ‘doxxing’.
The Australian Government’s response to the Report is set out below. The response addresses
the recommendations contained in the Report and in the additional comments.
2
Committee’s Recommendations
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the minimum consultation period for the Children's Online
Privacy Code is extended to at least 60 days.
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of allowing sufficient time to seek meaningful
input from children and other stakeholders on the draft Children’s Online Privacy Code (COP
Code). The Government amended the Bill to increase the minimum consultation period for the
draft COP Code to 60 days.
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that the bill is amended to include a requirement for the
Information Commissioner to consult with relevant industry bodies or organisations when
developing the Children's Online Privacy Code.
The Government agrees in part with this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of consultation with industry organisations or
bodies representing entities that may potentially be bound by the COP Code as part of its
development. The Government amended the Bill to include reference to such industry
organisations or bodies in the indicative list of individuals or entities that the Information
Commissioner may consult with when developing the COP Code. This list also includes
children, relevant organisations or bodies concerned with children’s welfare and any other
person the Information Commissioner considers appropriate.
The relevant provision confers discretion on (rather than mandates) the Information
Commissioner to consult when developing the COP Code. This avoids the unintended
consequence of invalidating the COP Code if the Information Commissioner is unable to
consult exhaustively with certain organisations, bodies or persons.
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends the exclusion for media organisations from accessing personal
information during declared emergencies is extended to exclude national broadcasters such
as the ABC and Special Broadcasting Service.
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government amended the Bill to ensure national broadcasters (the ABC and SBS) are
excluded from accessing personal information under the emergency declaration provisions.
3
The Government also amended the Bill to ensure national broadcasters are excluded from
accessing personal information under eligible data breach declarations, which are a similar
mechanism to facilitate sharing of personal information to prevent or reduce the risk of harm
to individuals in the event of an eligible data breach.
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the bill is amended to empower the Information
Commissioner to issue a discretionary notice to an entity to remedy an alleged breach of one
or more of the provisions in section 13K before issuing an infringement notice.
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government amended the Bill to give the Information Commissioner and certain other
authorised persons a discretionary power to issue a compliance notice to an entity to remedy
an alleged breach of one or more of the provisions set out in section 13K before issuing an
infringement notice. This will enable the Information Commissioner and other authorised
persons to provide additional information to entities on how to comply with their obligations
under the Act if they reasonably believe the entity has contravened section 13K.
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends that the Explanatory Memorandum to the bill is amended to
make clear that the level of information required in privacy policies is not expected to
compromise commercial-in-confidence information about automated decision-making
systems.
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of increasing transparency for Australians without
unduly limiting businesses’ ability to carry on their operations.
The Government included information in the addendum to the Explanatory Memorandum to
the Bill to clarify that the information required in privacy policies is not expected to
compromise commercial-in-confidence information about automated decision-making
systems.
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends that the Commonwealth government considers amending clause
7 of the bill to:
• require a court to consider the matters of public interest that justify the invasion of
the plaintiff's privacy;
• not require a defendant to adduce evidence of public interest in every case; and
• provide that 'artistic expression' is a form of freedom of expression.
4
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government amended the Bill to require consideration of public interest balancing in every
case with no requirement on a defendant to adduce evidence about public interests. This
amendment recognises that public interest balancing may involve questions of law and fact,
and that a court may take judicial notice of public interests from the circumstances of the case.
The Government also amended the Bill to include express reference to artistic expression as a
form of freedom of expression. Although the list of public interest factors is non-exhaustive,
the express inclusion of artistic expression is consistent with the Australian Law Reform
Commission’s (ALRC’s) 2014 report Serious Invasions of Privacy in the Digital Era.
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends that the Commonwealth government considers amending
Schedule 2 of the bill to ensure that the journalism exemption applies to a person involved in
the publication, re-publication or distribution of journalistic material.
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government amended the Bill to expressly extend the exemption for journalists and
associated persons to persons publishing, re-publishing or distributing journalistic material
prepared by a journalist. This will ensure that persons facilitating journalism are covered by
the exemption.
Recommendation 8
The committee recommends that Schedule 2 of the bill is amended to make clear that the
concept of 'journalistic material' for the serious invasions of privacy tort includes 'editorial'
material.
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government amended Schedule 2 of the Bill to clarify that journalistic material includes
editorial content, where the editorial content relates to news, current affairs or a documentary.
This will address any ambiguity around whether editorial content is properly considered
journalistic material.
Recommendation 9
The committee recommends that Schedule 2 is amended to make clear that the power
conferred on a court to issue an injunction is not limited to an 'interim' injunction.
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
5
The Government amended the Bill to clarify that the power conferred on courts to issue an
injunction is not limited to interim injunctions. Courts may also provide interlocutory and final
injunctions as appropriate.
6
Senator Scarr’s Additional Recommendations
Recommendation 1
It is recommended that the Senate note the inappropriateness of the abbreviated timeline for
consideration of the Privacy and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2024 [Provisions];
especially given:
a) the importance of the legislation;
b) the failure of the government to circulate an exposure draft of the bill; and
c) the concurrent examination of other legislation in the same policy area making it
difficult for stakeholders to engage in depth.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Privacy Act Review undertaken by the Attorney-General’s Department began in late 2020
and involved extensive and broad public consultation. Written submissions were invited in
response to an issues paper and a discussion paper which included potential reforms to privacy
laws. This was followed by further public consultation on the proposals in the Privacy Act
Review Report, including on the measures in Schedules 1 and 2 of the Bill, to inform the
Government Response to that report. Over the course of this process, over 900 written
submission were received by the Attorney-General’s Department.
Public consultation on proposed legal reforms to address doxxing harms and behaviours,
including a statutory tort for serious invasions of privacy, took place in March 2024, with the
Attorney-General’s Department receiving 97 written submissions and convening a roundtable
on doxxing and privacy reforms with key stakeholders and experts.
Recommendation 2
It is recommended that the Senate call for the release of the ACIL Allen Cost Benefit Analysis
prior to debate on the bill with a view to ensuring that the Senate has the benefit of all relevant
analysis undertaken in relation to the subject matter of the bill prior to voting on the bill.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Cost Benefit Analysis prepared by ACIL Allen was commissioned for the purpose of
informing government decision-making processes on potential reforms to privacy law
proposed in the Privacy Act Review. Standard government processes provide for an impact
analysis, and accompanying assessment, to be published on the Office of Impact Analysis
website when a final decision has been taken and announced.
7
Recommendations 3 and 4
It is recommended that the Senate note the inappropriateness of including in the same bill,
provisions which amend different acts and/or deal with different policy areas in circumstances
where senators may reasonably be expected to have different views (in good faith) as to
whether the provisions in different schedules should be supported and be passed into law.
It is recommended that the Senate consider each schedule separately and that the government
do all things reasonably necessary to facilitate such consideration.
The Government notes these recommendations.
The Bill was introduced as a cohesive package that implements the Government’s
commitments to ensure Australians’ right to privacy is respected and protected, including by
addressing the practice of doxxing.
Recommendation 5
It is recommended that, as requested by a range of key stakeholders, the government provide
a road map, or strategy, regarding how future reforms will be progressed.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government has already committed to progressing further privacy reforms as a priority.
The second reading speech for the Bill noted that the Attorney-General’s Department is
currently developing draft provisions for further targeted consultation with key stakeholders.
This will include consultation with industry, small business, the media, consumer groups and
other key stakeholders, to ensure future reforms strike the right balance between protecting
people’s personal information, and allowing it to be used and shared in ways that benefit
individuals, society and the economy.
Recommendation 6
It is recommended that the Senate as a whole consider the scrutiny issues raised by the
Scrutiny of Legislation Committee with respect to the appropriateness of exempting
temporary Australian Privacy Principles Codes and emergency declarations from
disallowance given that such codes would have immediate effect and would only be
disallowed following consultation undertaken by the Scrutiny of Delegated Legislation
Committee with the minister.
The Government notes this recommendation.
Temporary Australian Privacy Principle (APP) codes are intended to respond to urgent
situations where it is in the public interest to provide clarity and certainty to entities on the
requirements of the APPs. Similarly, emergency declarations are intended to permit sharing of
personal information which would otherwise be prohibited under the Privacy Act between
8
government agencies, private sector organisations, non-government organisations and others
in emergency or disaster situations as specified in a declaration.
An exemption from disallowance is necessary to ensure temporary APP codes and emergency
declarations achieve their intended policy objective as soon as they are operational. In both
these situations, the prospect of disallowance may discourage entities from shifting their
information handling practices or disclosing information until the timeframe for dealing with
a Disallowance Motion has passed, where such action may be time critical to prevent harm or
render assistance to individuals at risk.
Although an instrument would only be disallowed following consultation between the Scrutiny
of Delegated Legislation Committee with the minister, this does not sufficiently mitigate the
prospect of disallowance discouraging entities from shifting their practices. Given the staffing
resources and time required to implement new processes or systems (and to revert back to the
original process), the risk of disallowance is likely to deter entities from amending their
practices in time to prevent harm. If an instrument was disallowed, this would also cause
significant inequities for those entities that had shifted their information handling practices in
reliance on the instrument.
Recommendation 7
It is recommended the government make addendums to the Explanatory Memorandum of the
bill as requested by the Scrutiny of Legislation Committee.
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
In Scrutiny Digest 13 of 2024, the Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of Bills
requested the Government table an addendum to the Explanatory Memorandum that contains
justifications for:
• the reverse burden provisions in proposed paragraphs 80Q(2)(b) and 80Q(2)(ba) and
proposed subsection 26XC(2), drawing on principles from the Attorney-General’s
Department’s Guide to Framing Commonwealth Offences, Infringement Notices and
Enforcement Powers, and
• the ability for delegated legislation to prescribe a country or binding scheme as
providing substantially similar protection to the APPs subject to conditions in relation
to a specified entity or class of entity or a specified kind or kinds of personal
information.
The Government included this information in the addendum to the Explanatory Memorandum
to the Bill tabled in the Senate on 28 November 2024.
Recommendation 8
It is recommended that the government and relevant agencies consider the recommendations
made by industry leaders with respect to providing greater clarity with respect to which
9
countries have ‘substantially similar’ privacy protections, including through prescribing
relevant countries and systems as soon as reasonably practicable to provide clarity to business
in relation to cross-border data transfers.
The Government notes this recommendation.
Following the targeted consultation process and subsequent decisions on further privacy
reforms to bring Australia closer in line with international jurisdictions, the Government will
give further consideration to examining and prescribing laws and schemes that have
comparable protections.
Recommendation 9
It is recommended that the government:
a) systematically review the submissions made to the inquiry;
b) consider any further amendments to Schedule 1 which would enhance the bill and
provide further clarity; and
c) consider the submissions made in this inquiry in relation to both implementing the
reforms contained in Schedule 1 and progressing the next stage of reforms.
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government carefully considered the evidence and submissions provided to the
Committee. The Government made a number of amendments to the Bill and the Explanatory
Memorandum that address concerns raised, and help to improve its clarity and operation.
The Government recognises that a number of submitters commented on proposals that will be
progressed in the next stage of reforms. The Government thanks submitters for their comments
on these proposals. The Attorney-General’s Department will have regard to these comments as
it progresses the next stage of reforms.
Recommendation 10
It is recommended that Schedule 2 be excised from the bill. Prior to any re-introduction into
the Parliament there needs to be further extensive consultation, including with respect to the
range of stakeholders who have made submissions in relation to potential unintended
consequences. As part of the consultation, the government should consider developments
since the Australian Law Reform Commission tabled its report recommending the
introduction of the statutory tort, including experiences in the United Kingdom with respect
to press freedom. Any reintroduction of a bill which proposes the introduction of the statutory
tort needs to be preceded by circulation of an exposure draft and consultation. Further, any
such bill will need to be the subject of detailed examination by the Legal and Constitutional
Affairs Committee with sufficient time to consider and balance competing views and
interests.
10
The Government does not agree to this recommendation.
A survey conducted by the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner in 2023 found
that nine out of ten Australians believe that compensation should be available through the
courts for privacy breaches. The statutory tort will provide a mechanism for compensation for
serious privacy breaches, including doxxing which has had harmful effects on individuals, and
technology-facilitated privacy invasions such as cyberstalking of women and individuals
experiencing family violence.
Ensuring that individuals have a clear right to seek a legal remedy against those who seriously
invade their privacy will ensure that our laws keep pace with community expectations and
advances in technology.
The statutory tort was carefully designed with safeguards including a public interest balancing
element, a range of defences and specific exemptions from liability. This includes a specific
exemption for journalists and associated persons, as well as an obligation on courts to
determine the application of the exemption as soon as practicable, which will address some of
the issues observed in other jurisdictions around the strategic use of litigation to restrict
journalism.
A statutory cause of action for serious invasions of privacy was recommended in 2008 by the
ALRC in report 108, For your Information: Australian Privacy Law and Practice. The ALRC
considered the appropriate model for a statutory cause of action in its 2014 report 123, Serious
invasions of privacy in the digital era and recommended that a statutory tort be enacted. Law
reform inquiries in other Australian jurisdictions have also recommended the introduction of
statutory cause of action for serious invasions of privacy.
Recommendation 11
It is recommended that the bill be amended to address the concern that the offence as drafted
may be too wide. In this regard, consideration should be given to the recommendations made
by the Law Council of Australia and the Australian Human Rights Commission.
The Government does not agree to this recommendation.
The Government carefully considered the recommendations made by the Law Council of
Australia and the Australian Human Rights Commission, and considered it was not necessary
to amend the Bill in response.
The Government is strongly committed to ensuring the safety and security of all Australians
and considers the offences introduced by the Bill to be an important measure in the current
environment.
It is not necessary to either narrow the offences or insert a defence for legitimate disclosures
of personal data. The doxxing offences were drafted to align with the long-standing elements
of existing offences for using postal or carriage services to menace or harass, which are
11
regularly applied by the courts. The Government included information in the Explanatory
Memorandum to the Bill to explain that the offences would not apply to legitimate conduct
such as media reporting, political commentary or public debate on matters of public interest
that is not done in a manner that would constitute menacing or harassing behaviour. In addition,
there is a real risk that any exception or defence would be abused by people purporting to act
in the public interest when engaging in menacing or harassing behaviour online.
It is also not necessary for the offences to expressly differentiate between the sentence that
should be imposed for the release of different types of personal data. Section 16A of the Crimes
Act 1914 (Matters to which court to have regard when passing sentence etc. – federal offences)
requires a court to impose a sentence that is of a severity appropriate in all the circumstances
of an offence and sets out matters that, where relevant and known to the court, must be taken
into account including the nature and circumstances of the offence, any injury, loss or damage
resulting from the offence, and any victim impact statement for the victim. As the Explanatory
Memorandum to the Bill explains, a court may take into account the amount or detail of the
personal data that is released, as well as the sensitivity of any information released alongside
the personal data.
12
Additional comments by the Australian Greens
The Government acknowledges the additional comments from Senator Shoebridge regarding
the need for comprehensive privacy reform.
The Government has committed to continue consulting on further privacy reforms, including a
fair and reasonable test and improved definitions of personal information and consent.
As outlined in the second reading speech for the Bill, the Attorney-General’s Department is
currently developing draft provisions. These will inform a targeted consultation process with
key stakeholders, which will inform Government decisions on further privacy reforms.
13
