THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER
MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

Ref No: MS26-000009

Senator the Hon Sue Lines
President of the Senate
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

Dear President Suk

| am writing to advise you that the Government responded to the recommendations of the
following committee reports during debate:

e The Senate Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade Inquiry into
the Defence Trade Controls Amendment Bill 2023, during debate in the
Federation Chamber on 19 March 2024;

e The Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security Inquiry into the
Defence Amendment (Safeguarding Australia’s Military Secrets) Bill 2023, during
debate in the Federation Chamber on 19 March 2024;

e The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works 4th report of 2024 -
Department of Defence - Facilities to Support Advanced Growler Phase 6, during
debate in the House of Representatives on 3 July 2024; and

e The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works report - Department of
Defence - Explosive Ordnance Facilities Northern NSW Redevelopment project and
other works, during debate in the House of Representatives on 21 November 2024.

| have enclosed the relevant extracts of the Hansard. | trust this information is of assistance.

Yours sincerely

RICHARD MARLES

po! ¢/2¢

Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 Telephone: (02) 6277 7800

Encl.:
1. Hansard - 19 March 2024 - Defence’s Amendment (Safeguarding Australia’s Military

Secrets) Bill 2023 and Defence Trade Controls Amendment Bill 2023.
2. Hansard - 3 July 2024 - Public Works Committee.
3. Hansard - 21 November 2024 - Public Works Committee.

COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA

PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES

House of Representatives

Official Hansard

Thursday, 21 November 2024

FORTY-SEVENTH PARLIAMENT
FIRST SESSION—SEVENTH PERIOD

BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

8274 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES Thursday, 21 November 2024

The bill builds upon the Australian government's work to address online harms for young people, including the
age assurance trial, establishing an online dating apps code, and legislating new criminal penalties for non-
consensual sharing of sexual deepfakes.

The government will ensure young Australians retain access to services that primarily provide education and
health services, and work constructively with stakeholders to ensure that only services that meet the strict criteria
under eSafety's powers are able to be accessed by children under 16 years.

This bill seeks to set a new normative value in society—that accessing social media is not the defining feature of
growing up in Australia.

I commend the bill to the House.

Debate adjourned.
PARLIAMENTARY ZONE

Proposed Works

Ms McBAIN (Eden-Monaro—Minister for Regional Development, Local Government and Territories) (09:43):
I move:

That, in accordance with section 5 of the Parliament Act 1974, the House approve the following proposal for work in the
Parliamentary Zone which was presented to the House on 6 November 2024, namely: Senator Neville Bonner AO
commemorative sculpture and associated works.

Approval is sought from the House for the National Capital Authority to commence work to install a life-sized
statue to commemorate the life of the late Senator Neville Bonner AO, a Jagera man from Queensland, near the Old
Parliament House Senate Rose Gardens.

Senator Bonner AO was the first Indigenous Australian elected to the Australian parliament, serving between
1971 and 1983. He was appointed by the Queensland parliament to fill a casual vacancy in the representation of
Queensland in the Senate, and later became the first Indigenous Australian to be elected to parliament by popular
vote. The statue installation is part of the NCA's program to commemorate underrepresented groups in Australia's
democracy.

The proposed statue is based on a photograph chosen by Senator Bonner's family of him in a suit, holding four
boomerangs, one he is preparing to throw. The NCA has consulted extensively with Mr Bonner's family, the United
Ngunnawal Elders Council and the Museum of Australian Democracy. The statue is due for completion in mid-
2025 and is expected to be unveiled in the second half of 2025 to mark an anniversary of Senator Bonner's life and
his service.

Question agreed to.

COMMITTEES
Public Works Joint Committee
Approval of Work

Dr LEIGH (Fenner—Assistant Minister for Competition, Charities and Treasury and Assistant Minister for
Employment) (09:45): I move:

That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following
proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the committee has
duly reported to Parliament: Department of Defence—Guided Weapons and Explosive Ordnance Storage Program Tranche 2.
The Department of Defence is proposing works to provide increased guided weapons and explosive ordnance
storage facilities at the Defence Establishment Orchard Hills, New South Wales, at an estimated cost of $244.9
million excluding GST. The proposed works include earth covered buildings for explosive ordnance storage, non-
explosive ordnance storage facilities, upgraded electrical supply infrastructure and engineering services required
for the new facilities.

The project was referred to the Public Works Committee on 1 July 2024. On 5 November 2024, the committee
tabled a report on the project in the House of Representatives recommending that the House resolve, pursuant to
section 18(7) of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, that it is expedient to carry out the project.

The committee also recommended that the project funding be increased to allow additional earth covered
buildings, which are currently below-the-line items, to be completed as part of this project. The government thanks
the committee for this recommendation. However, there is no additional funding available within the Defence
Integrated Investment Program to increase the project budget to allow additional earth covered buildings to be
delivered by the project. This is because all other funding within the Defence Integrated Investment Program has

a
CHAMBER

Thursday, 21 November 2024 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 8275

been allocated to other priorities outlined in the National Defence Strategy. Additional earth covered buildings can
only be delivered by the project if there are cost savings against other project scope elements during delivery. On
that basis, the government does not agree to the committee's recommendation.

Subject to parliamentary approval, the proposed works are expected to commence in late 2024 and be completed
by late 2026. On behalf of the government, I thank the committee, ably chaired by the member for Moreton, for
undertaking a timely inquiry. I commend the motion to the House.

Question agreed to.
Approval of Work

Dr LEIGH (Fenner—Assistant Minister for Competition, Charities and Treasury and Assistant Minister for
Employment) (09:48): I move:

That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following
proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the committee has
duly reported to Parliament: Department of Defence—Explosive Ordnance Facilities Northern NSW Redevelopment project.
The Department of Defence is proposing works to refurbish, upgrade and replace facilities at the Defence
Establishment Orchard Hills, New South Wales, at an estimated cost of $359.3 million excluding GST. The
proposed works include new and upgraded working facilities required for the procurement, storage, distribution and
maintenance of explosive ordnance and support activities; new and upgraded training facilities and student living-
in accommodation; upgraded base entry and perimeter security; and upgraded utilities and infrastructure to address
current and future capability requirements.

The project was referred to the Public Works Committee on 1 July 2024. On 5 November 2024, the committee
tabled a report in the House of Representatives recommending the House resolve, pursuant to section 18(7) of the
Public Works Committee Act 1969, that it is expedient to carry out the proposed works.

The committee also recommended that the project budget be increased to allow a second block of 60 additional
living-in accommodation rooms to be completed as part of the project. The government thanks the committee for
this recommendation; however, there is no additional funding available within the Defence Integrated Investment
Program to increase the project budget to allow a second block of living-in-accommodation rooms to be delivered
by the project. This is because all other funding within the Defence Integrated Investment Program has been
allocated to other priorities outlined in the National Defence Strategy. The second block of 60 additional living-in-
accommodation rooms can therefore only be delivered if there are cost savings against other project scope elements
during delivery. On that basis, the government does not agree to this recommendation.

Subject to parliamentary approval, construction of the proposed works is expected to commence in mid-2025 and
be completed by mid-2028. On behalf of the government, I thank the committee, ably chaired by the member for
Moreton, for undertaking a timely inquiry. I commend the motion to the House.

Question agreed to.
REGULATIONS AND DETERMINATIONS
Health Insurance (Extended Medicare Safety Net) Amendment (Indexation) Determination 2024

Ms RISHWORTH (Kingston—Minister for Social Services) (09:50): On behalf of the Minister for Health and
Aged Care, I move:

That, in accordance with section 10B of the Health Insurance Act 1973, the House approve the Health Insurance (Extended
Medicare Safety Net) Amendment (Indexation) Determination 2024 made on 12 November 2024 and presented to the House
on 18 November 2024.

Question agreed to.

COMMITTEES
National Disability Insurance Scheme Joint Committee
Report

Ms COKER (Corangamite) (09:52): On behalf of the Joint Standing Committee on the National Disability
Insurance Scheme, I present the committee's report, incorporating a dissenting report, entitled General issues:
annual report No. 2 of the 47th Parliament.

Report made a parliamentary paper in accordance with standing order 39(e).

Ms COKER: by leave—I'm pleased to table the Joint Standing Committee on the National Disability Insurance
Scheme's annual report No. 2 of the 47th Parliament. I'd like to thank everyone who lodged a submission, appeared
at public hearings or shared their views to us over the past year. I'd particularly like to thank all participants, their

a SS
CHAMBER
