THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER
MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

Ref No: MS26-000009

Senator the Hon Sue Lines
President of the Senate
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

Dear President Suk

| am writing to advise you that the Government responded to the recommendations of the
following committee reports during debate:

e The Senate Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade Inquiry into
the Defence Trade Controls Amendment Bill 2023, during debate in the
Federation Chamber on 19 March 2024;

e The Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security Inquiry into the
Defence Amendment (Safeguarding Australia’s Military Secrets) Bill 2023, during
debate in the Federation Chamber on 19 March 2024;

e The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works 4th report of 2024 -
Department of Defence - Facilities to Support Advanced Growler Phase 6, during
debate in the House of Representatives on 3 July 2024; and

e The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works report - Department of
Defence - Explosive Ordnance Facilities Northern NSW Redevelopment project and
other works, during debate in the House of Representatives on 21 November 2024.

| have enclosed the relevant extracts of the Hansard. | trust this information is of assistance.

Yours sincerely

RICHARD MARLES

po! ¢/2¢

Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 Telephone: (02) 6277 7800

Encl.:
1. Hansard - 19 March 2024 - Defence’s Amendment (Safeguarding Australia’s Military

Secrets) Bill 2023 and Defence Trade Controls Amendment Bill 2023.
2. Hansard - 3 July 2024 - Public Works Committee.
3. Hansard - 21 November 2024 - Public Works Committee.

a Y ore)

COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA

PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES

House of Representatives

Official Hansard

Tuesday, 19 March 2024

FORTY-SEVENTH PARLIAMENT
FIRST SESSION—FIFTH PERIOD

BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

1846 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, 19 March 2024

this act. The new committee will scrutinise the defence department's expeditious handling of these authorisations
very closely. (Time expired)

Mr THISTLETHWAITE (Kingsford Smith—Assistant Minister for Defence, Assistant Minister for Veterans’
Affairs and Assistant Minister for the Republic) (17:40): The Deputy Prime Minister referred the Defence
Amendment (Safeguarding Australia's Military Secrets) Bill 2023 to the Parliamentary Joint Committee on
Intelligence and Security for inquiry. | want to thank the PJCIS for its work on this bill, particularly given the fact
that the committee has a number of inquiries ongoing at the moment. The committee ultimately recommended the
bill be passed and made a number of other recommendations for which I will provide a response on behalf of the
government.

In relation to recommendation 1—to expand the exemption to the work authorisation requirement from the
International Committee of the Red Cross to include the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement—the
government agrees in principle. To ensure consistency with other legislation, particularly with the Criminal Code,
which has certain defences and exemptions for the Red Cross, Defence has been directed to work with other
departments to develop a common approach to addressing the issue, rather than through this bill alone.

In relation to recommendation 2—that the government assess whether existing legislation and procedures
sufficiently cover working or training for paramilitary organisations and militias—there is strong existing legislation
to address these threats, and Defence will continue to work the Attorney-General's Department to monitor the
adequacy of current legislation and procedures in relation to former defence personnel. In relation to
recommendation 3—that the words 'that would prejudice the security, defence or international relations of Australia’
be added in section 115B—the government considered this closely but does not agree with this recommendation.
The provision in section 115B is appropriately targeted and narrow in its application.

Further, requiring a direct linkage between the transfer of military tactics, techniques and procedures related to
information and the words 'prejudice the security, defence or international relations of Australia’ would make it
difficult to enforce the legislation. Military tactics, techniques and procedures information exists across a variety of
classifications and formats, making it difficult to establish a traditional link between the classification or nature of
information and the damage to national security. The result of this information being lost to foreign militaries may
also take significant time to manifest, and it may not be until Australian defence forces are engaged in conflict that
the impact of the knowledge transfer and its benefits to a foreign military are fully apparent.

The purpose of this bill is to enhance and extend the existing prohibitions on sharing military secrets. It seeks to
ensure that those individuals with knowledge of sensitive defence information do not engage in work or training for
foreign militaries, governments or entities that are damaging Australia's national security interests. I can assure the
House that this will be reflected in the bill's implementing procedures, authorisation processes and enforcement.

In relation to recommendation 4—that the government consider amending the bill to give the minister the power
to allow for bulk application approvals for companies who already have defence export control arrangements
approved—this would not be appropriate as, while a company may have defence export contro] authorisations,
individual owners or employees will have an array of complex personnel circumstances which require a case-by-
case assessment. Only by assessing each individual on a case-by-case basis is it possible to understand the harm
that could be done to Australia's national security as a result of an individual undertaking work or training for a
foreign military, government or entity.

Defence will work to ensure the work authorisation process under this bill is as streamlined as possible and is
responsive to critical business and personal priorities. The government understands the significant commercial and
financial impact that delays in work authorisations could have and has directed Defence to ensure that there is
sufficient capacity to process applications as expeditiously as possible while ensuring security arrangements and
requirements are met.

Recommendation 5 is that the government assess our existing legislation, that procedures covering former
national intelligence community officers and their work for foreign governments be strengthened and that we
address the need for further legislation. Noting the critical role of these officers in protecting Australia's national
security, Defence will work with relevant Commonwealth agencies to consider the committee's recommendations.

The Defence Trade Controls Amendment Bill was referred to the Senate Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs,
Defence and Trade for an inquiry and report. The government again thanks the committee for its work in conducting
the inquiry, which ultimately recommended that the bill be passed without delay. In response to the matters raised
by the Senate inquiry in its final report, and as part of the co-design process with stakeholders, I can foreshadow
that the government will be moving amendments to this bill.

I'll go through the government's response to those recommendations. In relation to recommendation 1—that the
definition of 'fundamental research’ be included in the bill itself and consideration be given to including additional

ee
FEDERATION CHAMBER

Tuesday, 19 March 2024 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 1847

exemptions in the bill where possible—the government agrees with this recommendation, and the amendments will
be moved to address this. In relation to recommendation 2 on the definition of ‘Australian persons’ and its
inconsistency with the United States' definition, the definition of ‘Australian person’ has been deliberately aligned
with the definition of 'US person’ in the International Traffic in Arms Regulations.

The government would also like to make it absolutely clear that, under Australian law, before any goods and
services can be provided to an entity or individual on the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade Consolidated
List—a list of all persons and entities listed under Australian sanctions laws—a sanctions permit from the Australian
Sanctions Office is required. The amendments in this bill will not override or change this requirement.

In relation to recommendation 3, Defence will continue to undertake consultation and engagement with impacted
stakeholders, including industry and the higher education research sectors, through its established working groups.
Defence is developing fact sheets for publication on the Defence website and dissemination to impacted sectors via
peak bodies. The fact sheets will articulate the legislative changes, what they mean for regulated entities and
individuals, next steps and where to obtain information.

In relation to recommendation 4, the government amendments to be moved are the product of co-design with
industry. The government has directed Defence to continue the co-design process it has been undertaking through
its established working groups for amendments to the subordinate regulations, instruments and definitions and in
the implementation of this regime.

In relation to recommendation 5, the government agrees it would be beneficial to expand the established working
groups to include additional representation from relevant Australian defence small and medium enterprises. It has
directed Defence to expand the membership of the working groups accordingly.

In relation to recommendation 6, the government agrees that a relevant parliamentary committee should review
the implementation of the reforms within three years of commencement. This is in addition to the three-year
independent review of the legislation the government has already committed to.

In relation to recommendation 7, the government agrees that Defence should be appropriately resourced to
provide advice to external stakeholders, with this being appropriately publicised. Defence has already commenced
work to upgrade the relevant ICT system to support new permit applications and expedited assessment.

Defence is expanding and increasing its education and outreach program, including by developing online learning
and education materials that stakeholders can use to support decision-making in relation to permit requirements and
other education and guidance materials. The department also has a 1800 number for the public to call to seek
assistance or advice.

In relation to recommendation 8—that Defence Export Controls be adequately resourced to undertake its work
as efficiently as possible—the government agrees that Defence should be appropriately resourced to support the
implementation of this bill.

In relation to the Greens dissenting report, the government does not agree with that recommendation, and the
government intends to pass the bill.

Mr WOLAHAN (Menzies) (17:50): I know that time is of the essence in passing and processing these bills, so
in that spirit I flag that I won't be using my full time, for those who are preparing to come next.

The most important and fundamental factor in conflict is the will to fight, and that is because war and conflict
are fundamentally a human endeavour. Humans are not computers or robots. We have emotions. We are part of
groups, tribes, families, units, formations, divisions and nations. In that aspect, the will to fight is so fundamental.
If executed properly it means—hopefully—we don't actually have to fight, and that's at the heart of AUKUS.
AUKUS isn't about preparing this nation for an actual conflict. It is designed to prevent conflict. It is designed to
get inside the heads of potential foes when they are war gaming and lead them to say ‘not today’.

As technology evolves, that question of ‘not today’ is one that has to continuously be asked, and one of the reasons
it has to continuously be asked is that technology evolves. AUKUS is a huge, multigenerational, nation-building
task in advancing our technology and equipment, and we can't do that if we don't have the mechanisms to protect
the secrets that underpin it. But we must never forget that what we are doing here also affects the humans that we
rely upon to take great risks and fight in our name. I acknowledge the member for Hunter here. I was in his electorate
on Monday to say farewell to the former member for Hunter's son, Jack Fitzgibbon, someone who put on our
uniform and was prepared to sacrifice his life—and lost his life—in the service of our nation.

In this nation we have 581,000 veterans, just under 60,000 full-time members of the Defence Force and 32,000
reserves. The SAMS part of the Defence Amendment (Safeguarding Australia's Military Secrets) Bill puts an anvil
over their heads and says, 'If you don't comply with certain requirements, you'll go from being a hero to a crim inal."
That's an important but really serious thing that we should acknowledge. The headline offence in SAMS is 20 years

NN —
FEDERATION CHAMBER
