THE HON RICHARD MARLES MP
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER
MINISTER FOR DEFENCE

Ref No: MS26-000009

Senator the Hon Sue Lines
President of the Senate
Parliament House
CANBERRA ACT 2600

Dear President Suk

| am writing to advise you that the Government responded to the recommendations of the
following committee reports during debate:

e The Senate Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade Inquiry into
the Defence Trade Controls Amendment Bill 2023, during debate in the
Federation Chamber on 19 March 2024;

e The Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security Inquiry into the
Defence Amendment (Safeguarding Australia’s Military Secrets) Bill 2023, during
debate in the Federation Chamber on 19 March 2024;

e The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works 4th report of 2024 -
Department of Defence - Facilities to Support Advanced Growler Phase 6, during
debate in the House of Representatives on 3 July 2024; and

e The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works report - Department of
Defence - Explosive Ordnance Facilities Northern NSW Redevelopment project and
other works, during debate in the House of Representatives on 21 November 2024.

| have enclosed the relevant extracts of the Hansard. | trust this information is of assistance.

Yours sincerely

RICHARD MARLES

po! ¢/2¢

Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 Telephone: (02) 6277 7800

Encl.:
1. Hansard - 19 March 2024 - Defence’s Amendment (Safeguarding Australia’s Military

Secrets) Bill 2023 and Defence Trade Controls Amendment Bill 2023.
2. Hansard - 3 July 2024 - Public Works Committee.
3. Hansard - 21 November 2024 - Public Works Committee.

PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES

House of Representatives

Official Hansard

Wednesday, 3 July 2024

FORTY-SEVENTH PARLIAMENT
FIRST SESSION—SIXTH PERIOD

BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

4846 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES Wednesday, 3 July 2024

Chester, D. J. Coleman, D. B. Conaghan, P. J.
Coulton, M. M. (Teller) Daniel, Z. Dutton, P. C.
Entsch, W. G. Fletcher, P. W. Gee, A. R.
Gillespie, D. A. Goodenough, I. R. Haines, H. M.
Hamilton, G. R. Hastie, A. W. Hawke, A. G.
Hogan, K. J. Howarth, L. R. Joyce, B. T. G.
Katter, R. C. Kennedy, S. P. Landry, M. L.

Le, D. Leeser, J. Ley, S. P.
Littleproud, D. Marino, N. B. McCormack, M. F.
McIntosh, M. I. McKenzie, Z. A. O'Brien, E. L.
O'Brien, L. S. Pasin, A. Pearce, G. B.

Pike, H. J. Pitt, K. J. Ramsey, R. E. (Teller)
Ryan, M. M. Scamps, S. A. Sharkie, R. C. C.
Spender, A. M. Steggall, Z. Stevens, J.

Sukkar, M. S. Taylor, A. J. Thompson, P.
Tink, K. J. van Manen, A. J. Vasta, R. X.

Violi, A. A. Wallace, A. B. Ware, J. L.
Webster, A. E. Wilkie, A. D. Willcox, A. J.
Wilson, R. J. Wolahan, K.

Question agreed to.

Debate adjourned.

COMMITTEES
Economics Committee
Reporting Date

Mr JONES (Whitlam—Assistant Treasurer and Minister for Financial Services) (10:17): I move:

That the reporting date for the inquiry of the Standing Committee on Economics into insurers' responses to recent natural
disasters in Australia be extended to 18 October 2024.

Question agreed to.

Public Works Joint Committee
Approval of Work

Dr LEIGH (Fenner—Assistant Minister for Competition, Charities and Treasury, Assistant Minister for
Employment) (10:17): I move:

That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following

proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the committee has
duly reported to Parliament: Department of Defence—Facilities to support Advanced Growler Phase 6.
The Department of Defence is proposing works to deliver upgrades to Australia's airborne electronic attack
capability, including ongoing advances to the EA-18G Growler aircraft to ensure they remain interoperable with
those operated by the United States Navy. The proposed works will provide new and upgraded maintenance,
logistics and storage facilities at RAAF Base Amberley in Queensland and the Delamere Air Weapons Range in the
Northern Territory and new specialised training facilities at Amberley. The total estimated cost of the works is
$228.2 million, excluding GST.

The proposed works were referred to the Public Works Committee on 7 February 2024. Following its inquiry,
the committee made two recommendations: firstly, that Defence report back to the PwC with the source location of
the steel that will be used in the proposed works once identified; and, secondly, that the House of Representatives
resolve that it is expedient to carry out the proposed works.

The issue of the source location of the steel was raised by the member for Makin in the public hearings. In
response, Defence said:

I can assure you that the share of Australian industry content in this project will be very high.
A Defence official went on to say:

As part of those Commonwealth Procurement Rules, there is guidance in terms of expectations of the Commonwealth for
material supply as part of that, and, therefore, the expectation would be that it would be Australian supplied steel that's delivered

as part of this project.

a SS
CHAMBER

Wednesday, 3 July 2024 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 4847

Subject to parliamentary approval, construction is expected to commence in early to mid-2025 for completion in
late 2026. On behalf of the government, I would like to thank the committee, ably led by the member for Moreton,
for undertaking a timely inquiry. | commend the motion to the House.

Question agreed to.
Approval of Work

Dr LEIGH (Fenner—Assistant Minister for Competition, Charities and Treasury, Assistant Minister for
Employment) (10:20): I move:

That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following
proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the committee has
duly reported to Parliament: Parks Australia—Mutitjulu essential services project.

Parks Australia is proposing to undertake essential services upgrade works within the township of Mutitjulu, which
is located within the Uluru-Kata Tjuta National Park in the Northern Territory. The scope of works will include the
replacement of essential power, water and sewerage systems across the township. The estimated total cost of the
project is $91.87 million, excluding GST. The proposed works were referred to the Public Works Committee on 27
February 2024. Following its inquiry, the committee recommended that the House of Representatives resolve that
it is expedient to carry out the proposed works. Subject to parliamentary approval, construction is expected to
commence in late 2024 with completion in late 2026. On behalf of the government, I would like to thank the
committee, ably led by the member for Moreton, for conducting a timely inquiry. | commend the motion to the
House.

Question agreed to.
Approval of Work

Dr LEIGH (Fenner—Assistant Minister for Competition, Charities and Treasury, Assistant Minister for
Employment) (10:22): I move:

That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following

proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the committee has
duly reported to Parliament: Department of Veterans' A ffairs—Proposed fit-out of new leased premises at 18 Marcus Clarke
Street, Canberra.
The Department of Veterans' A ffairs is proposing works to fit out its new national office at 18 Marcus Clarke Street,
Canberra City. The department expects to relocate to the new office at the expiry of the lease over its current
premises in May 2025. The estimated total cost of the works is $29.6 million, excluding GST. The proposed works
were referred to the Public Works Committee on 27 March 2024. Following its inquiry, the committee
recommended that the House of Representatives resolve that it is expedient to carry out the proposed works. Subject
to parliamentary approval, construction is expected to commence in August 2024 with completion in April 2025.
On behalf of the government, I would like to thank the committee, ably led by the member for Moreton, for
undertaking a timely inquiry. I commend the motion to the House.

Question agreed to.

Approval of Work

Dr LEIGH (Fenner—Assistant Minister for Competition, Charities and Treasury, Assistant Minister for
Employment) (10:23): I move:

That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following

proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the committee has
duly reported to Parliament: Department of Finance—Proposed fit-out of new Commonwealth Parliament offices, Perth.
The Department of Finance is proposing works to fit out the new Commonwealth parliament offices located at One
The Esplanade, Elizabeth Quay, Perth. The proposed works will provide fit-for-purpose, safe and secure
accommodation for ministers, parliamentarians and their staff, together with accommodation for administrative
support staff of the Department of Finance. The total budget forecast is $38.2 million, GST exclusive. The proposed
works were referred to the Public Works Committee on 27 February 2024. Following its inquiry, the committee
recommended that the House of Representatives resolve that it is expedient to carry out the proposed works. Subject
to parliamentary approval, construction is expected to commence in mid-2024 for completion by February 2025.

On behalf of the government, I would like to thank the committee, ably led by the member for Moreton, for
undertaking a timely inquiry. I commend the motion to the House.

Question agreed to.

mw

CHAMBER
