Australian Government response to the Senate
Environment and Communications References
Committee report:
Internet Search Engine Services Online Safety
Code and under 16 social media ban
March 2026
OFFICIAL
Contents
Australian Government response ...................................................................................... 3
Recommendation 1: ...................................................................................................................... 3
Recommendation 2: ...................................................................................................................... 4
Recommendation 3: ...................................................................................................................... 5
Recommendation 4: ...................................................................................................................... 6
OFFICIAL
Australian Government response
The Australian Government’s response to the Report on ‘Internet Search Engine Services Online
Safety Code and under 16 social media ban’ is set out below.
Recommendation 1:
3.47 The committee recommends that the implementation of the Social Media Minimum Age
obligation be delayed until 10 June 2026 to allow time for the issues in implementation and
compliance to be properly considered and an education campaign for young people affected to be
rolled out.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The social media minimum age came into effect on 10 December 2025. A 12-month period between
passage of the legislation and commencement of the obligation provided industry with time to
implement appropriate age assurance systems to detect and remove under 16 accounts.
On 11 December 2025, the eSafety Commissioner gave information-gathering notices to 10 major
age-restricted social media platforms, seeking information on their compliance with the social media
minimum age obligation. Preliminary data shows about 4.7 million under-16 accounts on age-
restricted social media platforms were removed or restricted within days of the obligation taking
effect.
The eSafety Commissioner will continue to assess compliance with the law and expects platforms to
continuously improve their efforts to detect and remove access to under-16 accounts.
The Government has been clear publicly, and with platforms, that there is no expectation that every
user under 16 will be off age-restricted social media platforms. Instead, the onus is strictly on
platforms to take reasonable steps to prevent age-restricted users having accounts on their
platform.
To support the implementation of the obligation, the Government invested $20 million into the
national public awareness campaign. That campaign launched on 19 October 2025 and will continue
through to April 2026. The campaign supports parents, carers and young people under 16 prepare
for, and navigate the changes, and directs them to the range of resources available on the eSafety
Commissioner’s website.
There will also be an independent review of the legislation initiated within 2 years of effective
commencement of the social media minimum age obligation.
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 2:
3.48 The committee recommends that the Australian Government legislate a digital duty of care to
make online platforms safer for all users.
The Government agrees to this recommendation and has announced its intention to legislate a
digital duty of care under the Online Safety Act.
A duty of care will require online services to take reasonable steps to prevent foreseeable harms and
create a safer online environment.
Work is underway to develop a model appropriate to the Australian context and in line with
community expectations. The Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development,
Communications, Sport and the Arts has conducted a public survey and has engaged in a series of
meetings with young people, with industry and with key community organisations to inform the
design of a digital duty of care model.
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 3:
3.49 The committee recommends that the Australian Government legislate to prohibit platforms
from harvesting and exploiting the data of minors and protect young people from targeted,
unsolicited advertisements and algorithms as a matter of priority, with a view for this to apply to all
users in the long-term to protect all Australians’ safety and privacy.
The Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
The Government is acting to ensure young Australians are safe online and to uplift personal data
protections for all Australians.
The Privacy and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2024 (Cth) (Privacy Amendment Act) represented
the first stage of the Government’s commitment to uplifting Australia’s privacy laws. It contains the
framework for the Australian Information Commissioner to develop a Children’s Online Privacy Code
(Code), which must be registered by December 2026. The Code will specify how the Australian
Privacy Principles must be met by social media and other online services (including websites, apps
and online gaming services) likely to be accessed by children. The Government provided almost
$3 million to support the Code’s development.
The Government is committed to ensuring the Privacy Act is fit for purpose in the digital age and is
continuing work on a second tranche of privacy reform. Relevant reforms under consideration
include requiring information handling to be fair and reasonable in the circumstances and clarifying
obligations relating to direct marketing and targeting.
In parallel to updating Australia’s privacy framework, the Government is alert to ensuring that our
criminal laws are fit-for-purpose to protect Australians’ online safety and that they remain
responsive to new and emerging online harms.
The Government is also aware of the security risks stemming from the collection, aggregation and
trade of data derived from Australians – including that which falls outside the scope of existing
privacy regulation. This data is purchased via commercial data markets and used by digital
marketers, and others, to build detailed profiles of individuals’ online habits and patterns of life. The
Government is seeking to uplift industry practices and improve transparency to reduce potential
harms via the 2023-2030 Australian Cyber Security Strategy.
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 4:
3.50 The committee recommends that the eSafety Commissioner roll out an education program,
including through schools, that delivers clear information to young people about the platforms that
are covered by the Social Media Minimum Age obligation and what the impacts on young people will
be, as well as information about digital literacy and online safety
The Government agrees in principle to this recommendation.
The Government acknowledges that the social media minimum age is a significant change, which is
why a range of resources have been developed to support children and young people, parents and
carers, and educators with the changes.
On 19 October 2025, the national campaign ‘For the good of their wellbeing’ was launched to
support parents, carers and young people under 16 prepare for and navigate the changes. The
$20 million campaign consists of paid advertising, public relations, community and cultural outreach
activities and will run until April 2026.
As part of the campaign, information kits have been distributed to secondary schools, youth peak
bodies and organisations, youth services, public libraries, councils, and sporting networks nationally.
State and territory education sectors, school principals and frontline mental health organisations like
headspace, ReachOut and Beyond Blue, have also received a digital information kit, which provides
information about the social media minimum age, what it means for young people, and addressing
some of the myths about the laws. The kit contains resources such as factsheets, flyers and
presentations that can be printed and distributed directly by organisations to their networks.
Concurrently, the eSafety Commissioner launched a comprehensive online hub at
www.esafety.gov.au/about-us/industry-regulation/social-media-age-restrictions-hub. The hub
incorporates advice and support for educators, parents, carers and young people. It includes tailored
FAQs explaining what is happening, a list of the platforms the eSafety Commissioner has assessed as
age-restricted social media platforms and information on how to prepare for the change. The hub
includes conversations starters, a digital literacy resource, get-ready guides, a video series for
schools and parents and carers, downloadable action plans, health and wellbeing advice, and
support for reporting online harms to eSafety if things go wrong. It also links to a series of webinars
for parents, families and educators.
The hub adds to eSafety’s existing support for students, educators and families, and includes
ongoing engagement with and support of the National Online Safety Education Council (NOSEC),
Parent Advisory Group, eSafety Champions and Trusted eSafety Provider Program.
Government has also invested into broader efforts to improve digital literacy and online safety.
The eSafety Commissioner is Australia’s independent regulator and educator for online safety. Their
primary purpose is to help safeguard Australians at risk of online harms and to promote safer, more
positive online experiences. The eSafety Commissioner provides evidence-based, age-appropriate
resources, training, and frameworks to educators, parents, and community members.
Under the National Strategy to Prevent and Respond to Child Sexual Abuse 2021-2030, the eSafety
Commissioner received funding to deliver targeted online safety education that helps parents and
families to recognise and prevent harmful behaviours online, focussing on issues related to online
child sexual abuse and child safety.
OFFICIAL
The government has provided $12 million to the Alannah and Madeline Foundation (AMF) for
delivery of its ‘Safe Kids are eSmart kids’ digital and media literacy education program in Australian
schools. This program provides schools with free tools to teach kids how to be safe, smart and
responsible in the digital world.
AMF have also developed new resources to support understanding and preparedness for young
Australians, their families, and educators about the obligation. This includes family info sheets,
teacher resources, and student worksheets available for free on their website. Additionally, a news
post with information on affected platforms, digital literacy, online safety and impacts to young
people was directly emailed to over 13,000 contacts and shared via social channels.
The government has committed $450,000 to SmackTalk to expand their program to better protect
young Australians from online sextortion. It will broaden their reach and support development of
free resources and education on risks, warning signs, and safety strategies for young Australians,
parents, and community members. Funding will also support ongoing learning and strengthen
collaboration with eSafety, law-enforcement agencies, schools, and community groups.
The Australian Federal Police (AFP), in partnership with state and territory police and industry
partners, delivers the ThinkUKnow prevention and education program to students, parents, carers
and educators. The program provides schools, community groups and organisations with free
presentations addressing online child sexual exploitation including self-generated child abuse
material, online grooming, and sexual extortion. It encourages help seeking behaviour and
encourages reporting to the AFP-led Australian Centre to Counter Child Exploitation no matter the
age or platform the abuse has taken place on.
OFFICIAL
