OFFICIAL
Australian Government response to the
Finance and Public Administration Legislation Committee
Report:
Public Governance, Performance and Accountability
Amendment (Vaccine Indemnity) Bill 2023
18 MARCH, 2024
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Overview
The Australian Government provides the following responses to the recommendations from
the Finance and Public Administration Legislation Committee Report into Public Governance,
Performance and Accountability Amendment (Vaccine Indemnity) Bill 2023.
While recommendation two requires no further action as the Bill was not passed,
recommendation one still holds one response to be considered.
The Australian Government is already working towards the recommendation put forth by
the committee in the Report.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Committee Recommendation 1
1.108 The Committee recommends that the Australian government review the COVID-19
Vaccine Claims Scheme and consider the merits of a National no-fault vaccine injury
compensation scheme as part of the National Immunisation Strategy.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
The National Immunisation Strategy 2025-30 was released in 2025 and recommended that
the feasibility of a no-fault vaccine compensation scheme for National Immunisation
Program (NIP) should be considered. The Department is currently progressing an
independent feasibility study for a no-fault vaccine injury compensation scheme for NIP
vaccines and will provide advice to Government in the first half of 2026.
The feasibility study will include a review of the COVID-19 Vaccine Claims Scheme, as well as
a review of international vaccine compensation schemes and other Australian indemnity
and compensation schemes. It will also include potential proposed models for a no-fault
compensation scheme for National Immunisation Program vaccines.
The undertaking of this study should not be seen to be pre-empt any decisions of
Government on the establishment of a no-fault compensation scheme or the feasibility of a
scheme in the Australian context.
Committee Recommendation 2
1.109 The Committee recommends that the Senate not pass the bill.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
OFFICIAL
