Australian Government response to the
Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and
Trade report:
Pursuing the Priorities of the Pacific: Inquiry into Australia's
alignment with the priorities of Pacific Island countries
October 2025
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the opportunity to respond to the report of the Joint
Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade: Foreign Affairs and Aid
Sub-committee (the Sub-committee) on its Inquiry into Australia’s response to the priorities
of Pacific Island countries and the Pacific region.
The Government has carefully considered the report and accepts in full, in principle or
partially the majority of the recommendations by the Sub-committee. The Government
appreciates the work of the Sub-committee and recognises the valuable contributions made to
the inquiry by all who provided submissions and testimony.
Australia’s relationships with Pacific island countries are long-standing and enduring based
on true partnerships, respect and friendship. These relationships are critical to Australia’s
national interests and national identity, recognising our shared geography, history and culture
and the deeply interconnected nature of our security and prosperity. Australia and
Pacific island countries share an ocean and a future as custodians of the Blue Pacific
Continent. The Government’s engagement in the Pacific aims to support national sovereignty
and democracy, promote prosperity and development, uphold regional unity, and foster peace
and security.
The Government started its first term with a commitment to bring new energy, resources and
respect to the Pacific and to listen and respond to Pacific priorities and needs. Successive
budgets have reinforced this commitment, including through record levels of official
development assistance ($2.15 billion in 2025-26) and our $1.9 billion Enhancing Pacific
Engagement package announced as part of the 2023-24 budget.
We have forged and implemented ground-breaking agreements with Tuvalu, Nauru, Papua
New Guinea (PNG) and Solomon Islands. These agreements embody the Government’s
commitment to being the Pacific’s partner of choice, responding to Pacific priorities with
tailored solutions and backing Pacific-led approaches to collective prosperity and security.
On 6 October, Prime Minister Albanese and PNG Prime Minister Marape signed the Papua
New Guinea-Australia Mutual Defence Treaty (Pukpuk Treaty). The Treaty elevates the
defence relationship between PNG and Australia to the status of an Alliance – Australia’s
first new Alliance in 74 years after the United States and New Zealand. Our new Alliance
reflects our commitment to each other and to a region that is peaceful, stable and prosperous.
The strategic trust we share also facilitated a game-changing innovation in our partnership
with the Australian Government’s commitment to a ten year, $600 million, partnership with
the PNG Government and the Australian Rugby League Commission to support a PNG team
to enter the National Rugby League competition from 2028.
The Nauru-Australia Treaty for closer relations entered into force on 19 September 2025,
elevating our unique and long-standing relationship to an integrated economic, social and
security partnership. The Treaty has delivered major transformational outcomes, including
ensuring a continued physical banking presence and access to the international financial
market for Nauruans with the commencement of operations by the Commonwealth Bank of
Australia on 18 August 202. Nauru and Australia will also expand our security cooperation,
committing to consult on developments that threaten our collective sovereignty, peace or
stability. To underpin this commitment, we will mutually agree any engagement by others in
Nauru’s security, banking and telecommunications sectors.
The Australian Government continues to deliver on its commitments under the Falepili Union
with Tuvalu, demonstrating what Australia and the Pacific can do together when we work
hand in hand for our shared future. The Falepili mobility pathway ballot was drawn for the
first time on 25 July 2025, providing Tuvaluans an unprecedented opportunity to live, work
and study in Australia.
In response to a request by Solomon Islands, the Australian and Solomon Islands
Governments announced a new package of support for the Royal Solomon Islands Police
Force (RSIPF) on 20 December 2024. Guided by Solomon Islands’ priorities, the four-year
package will grow the size and capability of the RSIPF through funding, training and
infrastructure support, including the design and later construction of a new fit-for-purpose
Police Academy in Honiara. The Australian Government continues to support Solomon
Islands’ evolving security priorities, which reinforces our view, and the view of Pacific
Islands Forum Leaders, that Pacific security is best handled by the Pacific.
These long-term, unique investments complement Australia’s broader Pacific partnerships
and are designed to make our region more prosperous, secure, and resilient. The Government
thanks the Sub-committee for its work in preparing this report and considering the
submissions.
Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government continues to work towards
securing bipartisan support for the international development program, including
through indexation, for the long-term growth of the aid program.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Australian Government recognises the importance of securing bipartisan support to
ensure the long-term sustainability and growth of the international development program.
Indexation of the official development assistance (ODA) budget aligns with the
Government’s commitment to delivering predictable and sustained support to our Indo-
Pacific partnerships and broader global efforts.
To support bipartisan engagement and awareness, the Department of Foreign Affairs and
Trade (DFAT) is leveraging initiatives such as the Australian Regional Leadership
Initiative to build informed policy support by showcasing the positive impacts of
international development through evidence-driven insights targeted at Australian
parliamentarians. DFAT’s partnerships with policy-relevant think tanks have produced
public-facing research and analysis that examine the link between Australia’s development
assistance and its broader foreign policy and national interest. This analysis is targeted at,
and helps to inform and influence, the broader national security and international affairs
policy community and the decisionmakers within it. This analysis aims to build a broader
understanding among parliamentary and government decision makers about the value and
impact of Australia’s development program as a tool of statecraft.
DFAT is also actively exploring new initiatives that bolster public understanding and
bipartisan support for Australia’s international development program through education,
transparency, strategic partnerships and media engagement.
These efforts will help to strengthen parliamentary understanding and secure bipartisan
support for the international development program, ensuring Australia remains a trusted
and responsive partner in the Pacific and beyond.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, following consultations
with Australian non-government organisations and Pacific Civil Society Organisations,
prioritises funding for Civil Society Organisations within the Official Development
Assistance budget.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of civil society and non-government
organisations (NGOs) to sustainable development. NGOs and civil society organisations
are critical partners for Australia’s international development and humanitarian response
programs. They are also important development actors in their own right.
The Government has committed to a Civil Society Partnerships Fund that will support civil
society organisations (CSOs) and address the challenges of shrinking civic space in many
parts of the world. As a key priority, the Government has committed $35 million over four
years for activities to improve access to civic space, working closely with CSOs across our
region. DFAT will continue to consult with a range of stakeholders on the design of this
Fund.
The Australian NGO Cooperation Program (ANCP) is the Australian Government’s
longest running and largest NGO program with $143 million allocated in 2025-26. The
ANCP supports Australian NGOs and local partners to deliver projects globally and across
the Pacific including in health, education, food security and civil society strengthening.
The Government notes the Committee’s findings that “Vital though CSOs are to the
prosperity of the region and the wellbeing of its peoples, the Committee also recognises
other avenues for ODA must be maintained. The exact balance between local, bilateral, and
multilateral funding, as well as the ways in which ODA is allocated across different
sectors, will be an ongoing project for DFAT. As such, the Committee does not consider it
appropriate to commit to specific allocations of ODA by sector and will continue to
examine options to work with all relevant stakeholders, including Australian NGOs, in
meeting objectives laid out in development partnership plans.”
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government examines the share of
Overseas Development Assistance received by for-profit managing contractors, with a
view to increasing the share received by Pacific civil society organisations and
Australian non-government organisations.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government recognises the important role that different types of delivery partners play
in delivering Australia’s ODA. There is no formula or fixed allocation to different types of
delivery partners. DFAT chooses delivery partners for its development investments based
on careful assessments of who is best placed to achieve the objectives and deliver the
results we are seeking.
Using a range of delivery partners, including multilateral organisations, NGOs, partner
governments, other Australian Government organisations, universities and academic
institutions and contractors allows DFAT to deliver the program efficiently and effectively
and reflects that different types of delivery partners offer different strengths.
Where a large (more than $500,000) development program or investment is being
contracted, DFAT uses open and competitive procurement as its default process. This
means that any type of organisation can bid for these contracts. Australian NGOs can, and
do, bid for contracts in Australia’s development program. Australian NGOs are also sub-
contracted by larger managing contractors. In 2023-24, $502 million was provided to
Australian NGOs to implement programs through subcontracts.
Managing contractors also generate significant local employment opportunities and
opportunities for local businesses supplying goods and services in partner countries.
In 2023-24, 4,839 local staff were employed under programs delivered by managing
contractors and $681 million was provided in subcontracts to local organisations in partner
countries.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government respond to the stated
priority of the Papua New Guinea (PNG) Government and increase support through
overseas development assistance via PNG or directly to YWAM to enable the life
extension of the YWAM Medical Ship.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation.
Australia’s development program in PNG is guided by the Australia – Papua New Guinea
Development Partnership Plan 2024-2029 developed in close consultation with the PNG
Government and responding to the PNG Government’s health priorities. There are
Australian-funded health projects in every PNG province as well as the Autonomous
Region of Bougainville.
Youth with a Mission Medical Ships (YWAM MS) plays a role as a delivery partner for
Australia’s development program, supporting primary health care in some rural areas.
The Australian Government provided a contribution of $4 million in 2024-25 to the repair
and refit of the YWAM vessel, MV YWAM PNG, to enable it to continue operating and
delivering health services to rural populations in PNG.
Australia also provides funding to YWAM MS to deliver primary healthcare in PNG’s
Western Province. This includes new funding of $1.26 million (for April to December
2025), which builds on earlier funding of $1.40 million for the period May 2023 to March
2025 and $1 million for COVID-19 vaccination activities in 2021 and 2022.
In total, the Australian Government is providing over $7.6 million in funding to YWAM
MS over a four-year period (2021-2025).
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends that where Pacific Island countries and Pacific civil society
organisations seek to access climate finance, the Australian Government, having made a
contribution to the Loss and Damage Fund for Developing Countries:
• take steps to improve and streamline the process
• advocate globally for the creation of more equitable climate finance
arrangements, in consultation with affected communities, with a view to
facilitating access by the most vulnerable communities across the Pacific and
elsewhere
• consider support for the establishment of, funding for, and advocating for other
institutional donors to support locally-managed climate finance and climate
adaptation funds to support quick and targeted dispersal, including the Pacific
Resilience Fund
• explore other measures to improve access to climate finance for the most
vulnerable and most effected by climate change in the Pacific.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation.
A key priority for Australia is securing and enhancing access to climate finance for those
countries most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change, particularly Pacific island
countries. This includes advocacy which is informed by Pacific consultation and seeks to
enhance and streamline processes to access climate finance managed by the Global
Environment Facility and Green Climate Fund (GCF) – funds which play an important
catalytic role in advancing systemic change while mobilising additional finance.
Australia has re-engaged with the GCF through a $50 million contribution to the second
GCF replenishment (2024-27) and as a GCF Board member in 2025. Through this role,
Australia is advocating for and supporting streamlining measures and enhancing Pacific
access to GCF Readiness funding to strengthen institutional capacities, governance
mechanisms, and planning and programming frameworks towards a long-term climate
action agenda. A new GCF Executive Director is driving strong reforms, focusing on
simplifying accreditation and project approval processes, including a commitment to move
projects from concept to approval in nine months or less (a key criticism from the Pacific is
the time taken from concept to approval stages). We acknowledge that over the past year
the GCF has made tangible efforts to engage with, and work better, with the Pacific and
small island developing states (SIDs) more broadly, resulting in a quadrupling of approved
Pacific projects so far in 2025 to over USD225 million and 12 per cent of the GCF global
approvals. The GCF Executive Director has increased engagement with the Pacific,
including Mafalda’s participation in the Pacific Island Forum Leaders Meeting in 2024 and
the SIDs conference on “Charting the Course Toward Resilient Prosperity” in 2024 in
Antigua and Barbuda.
Australia has pledged $50 million to the Fund for responding to Loss and Damage (FRLD).
Australia joined the Board in July 2025 and is working closely with Board members,
particularly those from Cook Islands, Fiji, New Zealand, Timor Leste and Vanuatu to
support Pacific engagement and access. The FRLD is being operationalised with key
decisions including the adoption of a Resource Allocation Framework and parameters still
to be taken. Australia will continue to work constructively with Board members to pursue
outcomes that support Pacific interests.
Australia was pleased to join with fellow Pacific Islands Forum Leaders in signing the
Pacific Resilience Facility Establishment Treaty at the Forum leaders meeting in Honiara
in September 2025. Australia has pledged a foundational $100 million contribution to the
Pacific Resilience Facility. As a Pacific-led, owned and managed financing facility, the
Facility will provide grants for climate adaptation, disaster preparedness, nature-based
solutions and projects which respond to loss and damage. Funding from other donors will
be required to meet the Pacific’s initial fundraising goal of USD500 million.
These specific efforts in supporting engagement with global climate funds comes in
addition to the Government’s strengthening of our contribution to global climate finance
goals. The Government increased Australia’s climate finance contribution from $2 billion
to $3 billion for the period 2020-2025.
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government commits to identify any
future climate finance contributions within the Overseas Development Assistance budget
by 2026-27.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government’s current climate finance commitment covers the period 2020-25.
The Government expects to have delivered $3 billion in climate finance over that period.
The Government will consider a new climate finance commitment in due course.
The International Development Policy released in August 2023 commits Australia to
strengthening climate resilience across our international development program by:
• ensuring that from 2024-25, at least half of all new country and regional
investments valued over $3 million have a climate change objective – rising to
80 per cent in 2028-29;
• considering climate risk in all bilateral and regional Development Partnership
Plans; and
• aligning bilateral programs with partners’ Nationally Determined Contributions and
National Adaptation Plans.
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government publicly commits to ensure
that no Overseas Development Assistance will be spent on fossil fuel projects in the
Pacific by 2026–27. This policy should be implemented in consultation with Pacific
Island Forum leaders.
Response:
The Government accepts in principle this recommendation.
The Australian Government has set a clear direction for the alignment of our international
public support with the clean energy transition. On 5 December 2023 at COP28 in Dubai,
the Australian Government joined the Statement on International Public Support for the
Clean Energy Transition (known as the Glasgow Statement or Clean Energy Transition
Partnership (CETP)). As a member to the CETP, the Australian Government will not
finance new international unabated fossil fuel energy sector projects from 5 December
2024, except in limited and clearly defined circumstances. Australia’s CETP Guidelines
(published on 5 December 2024) clearly outline the Government’s policy for the provision
of international public support. The Guidelines state that Australia's ODA, including that
provided by the Australian Infrastructure Financing Facility for the Pacific (AIFFP), falls
in scope of the CETP commitment.
The Government’s CETP commitment is consistent with Australia’s commitments as a
member of the Pacific Islands Forum, including to transition away from coal, oil and gas in
our energy systems, in line with the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change pathways
for limiting global average temperatures to 1.5 degrees above preindustrial levels. This was
consulted with and agreed by Forum Leaders in the 52nd Pacific Islands Forum
Communique in November 2023. Forum Members have also committed to the
establishment of a regional Energy Commissioner for a Just Transition to a Fossil Fuel
Free Pacific.
Some AIFFP projects will require use of the National Interest Exemption where projects
support the energy transition but may require supplementary use of fossil fuels. This would
only apply where projects support Pacific island countries’ (and Timor Leste’s) transition
to renewable energy and therefore should not conflict with the overall intent of Australia’s
commitment under the CETP.
Climate change is prioritised in Australia’s International Development Policy which guides
Australia’s development program and ODA. Specifically, the Development Policy
commits to increasing climate investments and better addressing climate risks.
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government use its position on the
International Seabed Authority Council to seek robust regulatory arrangements with the
strongest possible environmental protections before seabed mining commences.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation.
As a member of the International Seabed Authority (ISA) Council, Australia is an active
participant in the negotiations on the Exploitation Regulations, attending each of the
Council meetings as well as facilitating intersessional work.
Australia’s position is that mining of the deep seabed beyond national jurisdiction should
not commence until a comprehensive and robust regulatory framework is in place,
negotiated through the International Seabed Authority (ISA) in accordance with the UN
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). We are focused on achieving a regulatory
framework that provides for assessment of potential environmental impacts based on
scientific evidence, includes strong environmental protections and includes robust
inspection, compliance and enforcement mechanisms.
Recommendation 9
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government considers options to
strengthen the Australian National Contact Point for Responsible Business Conduct
(AusNCP), including by:
• increasing funding for the AusNCP
• introducing additional powers to enable the AusNCP to investigate and sanction
Australian corporations for human rights and environmental violations overseas.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian National Contact Point for Responsible Business Conduct (AusNCP) is a
function provided by The Treasury to fulfil Australia’s obligations under the Organisation
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) Declaration on International
Investment and Multinational Enterprises. The Declaration includes the OECD Guidelines
for Multinational Enterprises on Responsible Business Conduct (OECD Guidelines). These
are voluntary principles and standards on responsible business conduct for multinational
enterprises, covering areas such as human rights, the environment, governance and
employment.
The AusNCP’s functions include:
• promoting the OECD Guidelines and recommending to multinational enterprises
operating in or from Australia that they observe the OECD Guidelines; and
• serving as a non-judicial grievance mechanism to contribute to the resolution of
issues raised about the conduct of multinational enterprises operating in or from
Australia, in relation to the OECD Guidelines.
The Government will take Recommendation 9 into account when making future decisions
about the AusNCP’s resourcing and operations.
Recommendation 10
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government considers Terms of
Reference and governance frameworks for the potential funding and partnership with
Australian academic institutions to build the capacity of local actors to undertake
surveys, including, where appropriate, into community attitudes and perceptions.
Response:
The Government accepts in principle this recommendation.
Research capacity and relationships between institutions are critical to establishing and
maintaining a vibrant research network that can underpin evidence-based policy making.
The Government is funding and partnering with Australian academic institutions to build
the capacity of Pacific actors to engage and understand local communities, including:
• the Pacific Research Program – Phase 2 (PRP II) ($27.8 million over four years)
partners the Australian National University and Lowy Institute with the Pacific
higher education sector to invest in the next generation of Pacific researchers,
including via research collaboration on the Pacific Attitudes Survey and large scale
longitudinal surveys in the region; and
• the Australia Awards program provides scholarships and short courses to
undertake university study, research and professional development in Australia and
the Pacific. Since 2017, over 5,000 Pacific recipients have been offered a long-term
scholarship and participated in short courses. Fellowships Round 19 of the
Australia Awards Fellowships program funded seven Australian universities (nine
programs) to host 93 Fellows from the Pacific, positioning them to advance
development outcomes in the following Priority Areas: health, digital economy,
climate change and Gender Equality, Disability and Social Inclusion (GEDSI). In
total, round 19 funded 141 Fellows from the Pacific across 16 Australian Host
Organisations. Fellowships Round 20 will see approximately 142 Fellows from the
Pacific funded across 13 Australian Organisations, including five Australian
Universities supporting Pacific Fellows across the Priority Areas. Since 2017,
Australia has provided in-depth leadership training to over 258 emerging Pacific
women leaders through the Australia Awards Women Leading and Influencing
program.
The Government is partnering with a range of Pacific higher education institutions with the
objective of supporting greater research capacity in the region. For example, our long-
standing partnership with the University of South Pacific ($86 million 2019-25) has
supported the signing of 10 Memorandums of Understanding/agreements between
Australian universities and individual Pacific universities. These agreements help to
deepen Pacific research capacity and support a vibrant research network in the region.
An independent evaluation of PRP II is now underway, which will inform future decisions,
including consideration of ways to deepen linkages between a broader range of Pacific and
Australian higher education institutions.
Recommendation 11
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government—in close consultation
with affected communities, national governments, and regional structures, and building
on the successes of the Australia-Tuvalu Falepili Union—seeks opportunities to
strengthen existing mobility pathways and consider additional options to support other
Pacific communities, including those affected by climate change.
Response:
The Government accepts in principle this recommendation.
The Australian Government is working closely with our Pacific partners on ways to deepen
links and strengthen regional and bilateral cooperation on shared challenges and
opportunities. Each Pacific island country has a unique relationship with Australia.
The Government understands how important mobility is to economic development and
staying connected and how establishing new economic opportunities can build resilience
among communities affected by climate change.
As a member of the Pacific Islands Forum, Australia endorsed the Pacific Regional
Framework on Climate Mobility in 2023 – an important milestone establishing regional
principles to navigate the complexity of climate mobility.
The Framework outlines principles for staying in place, planned relocation, migration and
displacement through a proactive, inclusive and collaborative regional approach, while
respecting national sovereignty and diversity. The implementation plan to underpin this
Framework was endorsed by Forum Members in 2025.
The Government is working with the region to support the Framework including through
Australia’s ongoing climate adaptation and resilience programs, which help people remain
in their communities and retain their social and cultural identity.
Australia does not provide a climate change visa, rather our priority is to strengthen
community resilience and support persons impacted by climate change in the Pacific,
enabling them to remain in their community. For instance, the Government is committed to
working with the Pacific to address the health impacts of climate change by strengthening
Pacific health system capacity to support climate resilience and adaptation as part of the
Pacific Climate and Health Resilience Package.
The Government will continue to engage Pacific partners on ways to build on our deep
cultural and people-to-people links. Since 2022, the Government has invested in new
mobility opportunities, streamlined visa arrangements and improved access for Pacific
island countries. This includes introducing the Pacific Engagement Visa (PEV),
commencing a family accompaniment pilot for long-term workers in the Pacific Australia
Labour Mobility (PALM) scheme, exempting Pacific students from increases to the
Student Visa Application Charge (VAC), prioritising Pacific access to faster and cheaper
mobile biometrics testing, and establishing dedicated Pacific Service Centre arrangements
to reduce Pacific Visitor Visa processing times from 43 days in October 2022 to 5 days in
August 2025.
The Falepili Union special mobility pathway is another way the Government is enhancing
mobility options that cater to specific needs through bilateral arrangements. The
Government is open to approaches from other countries on how we can enhance our
partnerships.
Recommendation 12
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government reviews at least every three
years key Pacific mobility schemes, including the Pacific Australia Labour Mobility
scheme and the Pacific Engagement Visa, with a view to:
• identifying issues faced by participants in Australia and upon return to their
communities
• evaluating the impact of these schemes on Pacific communities, families, and
particularly on children
• identifying and implementing measures to address any negative impacts of
mobility schemes on participants and communities of origin.
Response:
The Government partially accepts this recommendation.
The Australian Government is committed to the successful delivery of the PALM scheme
and the PEV program. The Government undertakes periodic evaluation of the PALM
scheme and PEV program to ensure both programs deliver on these outcomes.
PALM scheme
Worker wellbeing is of the highest priority for the Australian Government. The
Government has committed $440 million across successive budgets (2022-27) to expand
and improve the PALM scheme, including to better protect and support workers while in
Australia. For example, following concerns raised by workers and sending countries about
the negative impacts of long periods of family separation, the Government is undertaking,
and closely monitoring a Family Accompaniment pilot that will allow up to 200 workers to
bring their families to Australia.
The PALM scheme has in-built mechanisms around worker welfare, assurance and
compliance that assists to identify labour mobility issues or impacts that may need to be
addressed. The Government regularly commissions research and undertakes monitoring
and evaluation activities of the PALM scheme to strengthen the program and mitigates
impacts on workers and communities. This includes:
• in 2023, the Government commissioned an independent evaluation to assess the
effectiveness and efficiency of funding into the Pacific Labour Facility (PLF)1;
• funding for the Australian National University and World Bank to conduct the first
and second phase of the Pacific Mobility Survey – a longitudinal study that
examines a number of areas related to the PALM scheme including the economic
and social impacts on workers and sending countries; and
• targeted research and evaluation activities on the social and economic impacts of
specific sending countries and PALM programs.
Pacific Engagement Visa
The PEV program commenced in 2024 and has an inbuilt formal evaluation process three
years into the program’s operation. The evaluation will assess the effectiveness of the PEV
program, including the settlement outcomes for those who are granted a visa and migrate to
Australia This is expected to be conducted in mid-2027.
In addition, the PEV program will be actively monitored throughout the program’s
operation, including through other formal and informal evaluations and domestic and
international consultations. Program monitoring will identify settlement and other
migration issues faced by PEV holders in Australia, evaluate the impact of the PEV on
Pacific communities and identify measures to adjust PEV program settings to improve the
migration outcomes for PEV holders and Pacific communities.
Recommendation 13
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government explores opportunities to
establish more affordable and cost-effective short-term visa pathways for Pacific
academics.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government has heard the calls from the Pacific for greater access and
easier movement around the region and understands how important facilitating travel is to
economic development and staying connected.
Since 2022, the Government has invested in new mobility opportunities, streamlined visa
arrangements, and improved access for Pacific island countries. This includes introducing
the PEV, commencing a family accompaniment pilot for long-term workers in the PALM
scheme, exempting Pacific students from increases to the Student VAC implemented from
1 July 2024, prioritising Pacific access to faster and cheaper mobile biometrics testing, and
establishing dedicated Pacific Service Centre arrangements to reduce Pacific Visitor Visa
processing times from 43 days in October 2022 to 5 days in August 2025.
More specifically, there are visa pathways in place to support academics visiting Australia.
Academics who have been invited to observe or participate in an Australian research
project at an Australian tertiary or research institution, usually in collaboration with other
1 The PLF was initially responsible for the Pacific Labour Scheme (PLS) from October 2018. In November
2021 the PLS was merged with the Seasonal Worker Program to become the PALM scheme. In May 2022, the
Government announced that domestic operations of the PALM scheme would be moved to the Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations (including PLS functions that were previously managed by PLF). In
January 2024, the PLF took on responsibility for offshore PALM scheme support.
academics employed there, may apply for a Temporary Activity (subclass 408) visa. This
visa permits stays of up to 2 years in Australia for the visa applicant who may also include
their family members in the visa application.
Additionally, academics working for foreign governments may not be required to pay a
VAC for a Visitor (subclass 600) visa when travelling for business purposes. For those
academics who are not travelling in an official foreign government capacity who seek to
visit Australia for purposes such as to attend a conference, business meeting etc., they may
be eligible for the grant of a Visitor (subclass 600) visa valid for up to 3 years with a
maximum stay period per visit of 3 months.
The Government also undertakes initiatives that support Pacific academics’ engagement
with the Australian higher education sector such as via research grants and existing
partnerships with Pacific higher education institutions. These partnerships aim to support
greater collaboration and educational linkages with Australian universities, which may
include public speaking events and visits to Australia for Pacific academics.
Recommendation 14
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government considers extending the
New Colombo Plan to include postgraduate students.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The New Colombo Plan (NCP) provides pathways for Australian undergraduate university
students to develop their Indo-Pacific capability and Asia literacy through immersive,
structured learning and internships in our region.
Under the Financial Framework (Supplementary Powers) Regulations 1997 Schedule 1AB,
the NCP is mandated to provide benefits exclusively to Australian undergraduate students.
In July 2025, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator the Hon Penny Wong, announced
the next phase of the NCP. As part of the reforms, the Pacific is a priority region under the
NCP Mobility Program, with support for four to nine week credit-bearing experiences
which may include structured learning, internships, mentorships, practicums, and/or
research.
These reforms will also increase the number of scholarships to 500 annually by 2028,
introduce a new Semester Program to encourage longer-term study and establish a
program-wide language learning target focused on priority Asian languages.
Recommendation 15
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government considers significantly
lifting the Pacific Engagement Visa (PEV) cap for upcoming years and explores
opportunities to expand the PEV to other Pacific countries, where sufficient demand
exists.
Response:
The Government accepts in principle this recommendation.
The Australian Government is committed to the successful implementation of the PEV
which includes offering up to 3,000 visa places each year to countries across the region
that are in-scope to participate.
In the first instance, the PEV has been made available to independent Pacific island
countries that do not have an automatic citizenship pathway with New Zealand, the
United States or France.
Participation in the PEV is on an annual opt-in basis. The Government undertook extensive
consultations with all in-scope countries and understands some countries require further
time to consider their participation in the program. The opportunity will remain open for
countries in-scope to join ballots in future PEV program years.
The PEV has an in-built formal evaluation process three years into the program’s
operation. This is expected to be conducted in mid-2027. The PEV is a new program for
Australia and a new migration pathway for the Pacific and Timor-Leste. Noting the second
year of this new and innovative program only commenced in July 2025, we will continue
to review program settings and make any necessary adjustments in due course, taking into
account lessons learned.
Glossary
ABC Australian Broadcasting Corporation
ARLI Australian Regional Leadership Initiative
AusNCP The Australian National Contact Point for Responsible Business
Conduct
CETP Clean Energy Transition Partnership
CSO Civil Society Organisation
DFAT Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
FRLD Fund for responding to Loss and Damage
GCF Green Climate Fund
ISA International Seabed Authority
NGOs Non-government organisation
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OECD Guidelines OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises on Responsible
Business Conduct
ODA Official Development Assistance
PALM Pacific Australia Labour Mobility
PEV Pacific Engagement Visa
PIF Pacific Islands Forum
PLF Pacific Labour Facility
PLS Pacific Labour Scheme
PNG Papua New Guinea
PRP II Pacific Research Program – Phase 2
RSIPF Royal Solomon Islands Police Force
VAC Visa Application Charge
YWAM MS Youth with a Mission Medical Ships
