Australian Government response to the
Joint Standing Committee on the National Capital and
External Territories report:
Australia’s Antarctic Territory
Report on the Inquiry into the Importance of Antarctica
to Australia’s National Interests
MAY 2026
Introduction
On 22 February 2024, then Minister for the Environment and Water, the
Hon Tanya Plibersek MP, referred an inquiry into the importance of Antarctica to Australia’s
National interests to the Joint Standing Committee on the National Capital and External
Territories. On 27 February 2024, the Committee resolved to adopt the inquiry as follows:
The Joint Standing Committee in the National Capital and External Territories will
inquire into and report on the importance of Antarctica to Australia’s national interests,
including:
• upholding the principles of the Antarctic Treaty system;
• conserving and protecting the unique biodiversity and environment of Antarctica;
• developing a better understanding of global environmental and climate science; and
• contributing to Australia’s economic and social development.
On 10 February 2025, the Committee tabled a report titled Australia’s Antarctic Territory
Report on the Inquiry into the Importance of Antarctica to Australia’s National Interests.
The Government welcomes the findings of the report and the recognition of Australia’s
substantial national interests in Antarctica which reflect our continuing connection with the
region.
The Government agrees 8 of the Committee’s 13 recommendations in full, and a further 3 in
part/principle. The Government’s response to the Committee’s recommendations is as
follows.
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government continue its efforts to
establish an East Antarctic Marine Protected Area through the Antarctic Treaty system.
The Government agrees this recommendation.
The Government remains committed to the East Antarctic Marine Protected Area proposal.
Australia will continue to work closely with other members of the Commission for the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) – a forum of the Antarctic
Treaty system – to seek to implement the best conservation measures possible and uphold
CCAMLR’s objective to conserve Antarctic marine living resources. The Government notes
progress is dependent on agreement by all CCAMLR Members, consistent with CCAMLR’s
consensus approach to decision-making.
Australia is a world leader in marine conservation, with more than half of our oceans
(52 per cent) designated as marine protected areas. This includes the Government’s recent
310,000 km2 expansion of the sub-Antarctic Heard Island and McDonald Islands Marine
Reserve, in effect since January 2025.
Australia is a co-proponent of the East Antarctic Marine Protected Area proposal, which has
been under consideration by CCAMLR since 2012.
The proposed marine protected area covers approximately 1 million square kilometres in the
Southern Ocean. It would help conserve distinct ecosystems, providing scientific reference
zones to monitor the effects of fishing and climate change on Antarctic and Southern Ocean.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government should resume patrolling
Australia’s sub-Antarctic fisheries.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government, through Maritime Border Command within the Australian Border Force,
uses various capabilities to understand our maritime domain and deter and respond to civil
maritime security threats, including illegal exploitation of natural resources in Australian
waters. Maritime Border Command uses an intelligence-informed, risk-based approach to
combat these threats in Australia’s maritime jurisdiction.
The Government does not comment on operational matters. The ABF maintain awareness
through regular and structured engagement with the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD),
including scheduled monthly coordination meetings, ongoing information sharing, and ad hoc
discussions or as emerging matters arise.
The Australian Government Civil Maritime Security Strategy, released in 2022, sets out the
Government’s approach to civil maritime security in our maritime domain, which covers
10 per cent of the Earth’s surface. The Southern Ocean’s significance is underscored by its
vast and remote nature, which poses unique challenges for maritime surveillance and
enforcement.
The Government is exploring options to enhance maritime domain awareness in the
Southern Ocean.
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government increase the frequency of its
inspections of other Antarctic Treaty Parties’ Antarctic stations over 2025-26 and beyond.
The Australian Government should consider other methods of inspection such as satellite
imagery and drone use.
The Government agrees this recommendation.
Australia is one of the most active nations in undertaking inspections since the Antarctic
Treaty entered into force. This includes inspections of most facilities within the Australian
Antarctic Treaty (AAT), several inspections at locations outside the AAT, and one joint
inspection on the Antarctic Peninsula. The Government is committed to continuing a regular
program of future inspections.
Australia considers Antarctic inspections to be a key transparency, accountability and
confidence building measure under the Antarctic Treaty and Environmental Protocol.
Inspections also provide an opportunity to identify best-practice approaches to international
cooperation, scientific research, Antarctic operations and environmental stewardship.
Inspections are one of many tools used to understand the activities of other nations and
provide a formal mechanism to verify compliance with key provisions related to peaceful use,
non-militarisation and environmental protection.
Parties generally do not make inspection plans public in advance, and the Treaty allows for
inspections to be carried out without notice.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government undertake remediation
works on the deactivated Wilkes Station. These works should be completed by 2030.
The Government agrees this recommendation in part.
The Government is committed to protecting the Antarctic environment, including addressing
environmental impacts from past activities. However, the Government notes that 2030 is not
a viable timeframe for completion of this complex and sensitive remediation.
Legacy environmental impacts and waste affect all Antarctic nations. Australia is a leader in
environmental stewardship in Antarctica, including in scientific research and methods to
address contamination.
The Cleaner Antarctica science program will assess contamination and legacy waste,
environmental risk, and develop a prioritised, actionable clean-up strategy for all Australian
Antarctic stations.
Australia has completed targeted removal of waste and hazardous material over the last
several decades, including removal of approximately 10 cubic metres of waste from Wilkes
in 2024-25. Timing and scale of comprehensive remediation at Wilkes is dependent on
substantial planning, specialist resourcing and long-term reliable access to the site. Through
the Cleaner Antarctica science program, the Government is conducting comprehensive
assessments and remediation planning to achieve the best environmental outcomes.
Planning takes into consideration the unique Antarctic ecosystem, logistical constraints,
availability of specialist personnel and long lead times for projects of this nature.
In coming Antarctic seasons, the Government will continue to deliver remedial works
informed by these comprehensive assessments.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider options to provide
additional funding to Australian researchers for the development and publication of
research papers based on the data and samples retrieved by the Million Year Ice Core
project, the Denman Terrestrial Campaign, and the Denman Marine Voyage.
The Government agrees this recommendation.
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean are crucial for understanding and studying global climate
change and unique ecosystems. Changes in ice sheets track sea level rises, and ice core
drilling can help understand historical climate patterns. The Government is proud of
Australia’s contribution as a leader in this field. In the 2024-25 Antarctic season, the
Government supported 3 major science campaigns, with a focus on investigating the
impacts of climate change.
The Government values the publication of Australia’s Antarctic science and provides funding
for this purpose. Publication is a key performance measure of contribution to scientific
knowledge and of Australia’s leadership and excellence in Antarctic science. Research
funding for Antarctic science conducted under the Australian Antarctic Program covers the
lifecycle of the science process, including the publication of research findings including for
landmark projects such as the Million Year Ice Core project and Denman campaigns. The
high-quality data obtained from these projects will continue to inform research papers for
years to come.
To provide additional support the Government is providing $5.0 million over 2 years from
2026-27 in additional funding for the Australian Centre for Excellence in Antarctic Science
based at the University of Tasmania, to enable it to complete data analysis and publication
of research from the recent campaigns to the Denman Glacier.
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government implement
Recommendation 1 of the Australian Antarctic Science Council’s Australian Antarctic
Science Funding Model – Review 2023 before December 2025.
The Government agrees in principle with providing ongoing funding certainty as
recommended by the Australian Antarctic Science Council. The Joint Standing Committee
on National Capital and External Territories has acknowledged the challenges of an
Antarctic research funding model which involves multiple funding streams and entities. This
has included funds administered by the Australian Antarctic Division under DCCEEW and an
investment by the Australian Government through the Special Research Initiative run by the
Australian Research Council.
In the 2025-26 MYEFO, the Government announced an additional $5.0 million over 2 years
to support and sustain the Australian Centre for Excellence in Antarctic Science (ACEAS).
This funding will allow continued support for post-doctoral researchers and administration
staff at ACEAS until 2028. This funding ensures continuity for researchers.
The Government supports long-term certainty for Antarctic science and arrangements that
deliver integrated and strategic Antarctic science in support of Australia’s national Antarctic
interests.
Decisions about additional funding are a matter for future Government consideration.
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with the Southern
Ocean Observing System to secure its hosting within Australia over the long term.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Southern Ocean Observing System is a joint initiative of the Scientific Committee on
Oceanic Research and the Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research. The Southern
Ocean Observing System was developed to coordinate international research efforts to
gather and share data and advance understanding of the Southern Ocean.
The CSIRO continues to support the Southern Ocean Observing System through funding
and active engagement, including a recent 5-year commitment.
Hobart is internationally recognised as an Antarctic and Southern Ocean gateway, as well as
a centre of international Antarctic science, logistics, operational support and diplomacy –
including the headquarters of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine
Living Resources and the Agreement on the Conservation of Albatrosses and Petrels
Secretariat. The Southern Ocean Observing System International Project Office has been
based in Hobart since its launch in 2011 and is currently hosted by the University of
Tasmania’s Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies. The Commonwealth has periodically
provided the Southern Ocean Observing System International Project Office with funding.
Decisions about additional funding are a matter for future Government consideration.
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government prioritise the RSV Nuyina for
scientific research, and lease or acquire a second vessel to undertake the core resupply of
Australia’s Antarctic stations on an ongoing basis.
The Government agrees this recommendation in part.
The RSV Nuyina is a world-leading icebreaker, resupply and marine science vessel. This
government-owned national asset is the centrepiece of the Australian Antarctic Program. It is
the main lifeline to Australia’s Antarctic and sub-Antarctic research stations and the central
platform for Australian Antarctic and Southern Ocean research.
The RSV Nuyina also has unique science capability, with 150 marine science systems on
board including moon pool, wet well, and modular container laboratories. The success of the
vessel was recently demonstrated when it completed its first dedicated marine science
voyage to the Denman Glacier region in early 2025.
The Government is committed to maximising scientific outcomes in Antarctica. In the
2024-25 Budget the government provided $67.2 million for operation of RSV Nuyina which
delivered successful science and environmental management voyages to the Denman
Glacier and to Heard Island and McDonald Islands.
In the 2025-26 MYEFO, the Government committed a further $92.9 million over 4 years from
2026-27 for Antarctic shipping requirements.
This investment increases RSV Nuyina’s capacity for marine science and will deepen our
understanding of Antarctica, the impacts of climate change on the Southern Ocean, its
keystone species including krill and Antarctica’s role in the global climate system.
The Government also funds the RV Investigator (operated by CSIRO), a research vessel
that undertakes a range of marine science research in the Southern Ocean, and has
capability to operate to the ice edge.
Recommendation 9
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government review the state of
recreational facilities at Australia’s Antarctic stations and consider the upgrade of those
facilities as part of the Antarctic Infrastructure Renewal program.
The Government agrees this recommendation.
The Antarctic is a challenging environment to work in, and the Government is committed to
supporting physical and mental wellbeing in the workplace.
Expeditioners are at the centre of the Australian Antarctic Program. There are currently a
range of recreational activities available to expeditioners in Antarctica to support physical
activity and a healthy work-life balance. These include gym facilities, sports equipment, table
tennis, band and stage equipment. DCCEEW will continue to engage with expeditioners to
ensure recreation facilities continue to meet their needs, noting that some opportunities are
constrained by weather, logistical challenges, and operational requirements.
DCCEEW will continue to work with expeditioners to give them the best possible experience
living and working in Antarctica.
Recommendation 10
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government maintain Hobart as the base
of operations for the Australian Antarctic Division and Australian Antarctic Program.
Recommendation 11
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with the Tasmanian
Government to expedite the redevelopment of Macquarie Wharf No. 6.
Recommendation 12
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with the Tasmanian
Government to expedite the delivery of a refuelling solution for the RSV Nuyina at the Port
of Hobart.
The Government agrees these recommendations.
The Government is committed to retaining the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) of
DCCEEW in Hobart. The Antarctic sector provides a significant economic contribution to
Tasmania as a leading Antarctic and Southern Ocean gateway.
CSIRO maintains a significant marine laboratory in Hobart which supports Southern Ocean
research in partnerships with the AAD, Australian Antarctic Program Partnership, the
University of Tasmania’s Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies, and the Integrated
Marine Observing System, as well as the home port facilities for the RV Investigator.
In December 2022, the Government announced plans to develop a new world-leading
Antarctic krill aquarium and research facility at the University of Tasmania’s Taroona site.
Construction of the $36.7 million facility has commenced and is due to for completion by
early 2028. Officially named the Dr Isobel Bennett Southern Ocean Research Aquarium, the
facility will further strengthen Hobart’s position as a premier Antarctic science hub.
In October 2024, the Government committed to contributing $188 million over 4 years for the
construction of a new Macquarie Wharf 6 in the Port of Hobart through the Macquarie
Wharf 6 (Port of Hobart) Federation Funding Agreement (FFA) Schedule. Under the terms of
the FFA, the Tasmanian Government will guarantee priority access to Macquarie Wharf 6 as
the home port of the RSV Nuyina for the next 30 years, provide shore power and a refuelling
solution for the RSV Nuyina in the Port of Hobart, and work with the AAD on the
development of shoreside infrastructure to support Australian Antarctic Program operations.
Recommendation 13
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government develop a national
education and awareness campaign to promote Australia’s national interests in Antarctica
with a particular focus on students.
The Government agrees this recommendation.
The Australian Antarctic Program provides:
• education resources, including Classroom Antarctica, an online teaching resource
linked to the national curriculum
• Antarctic content and resources to Australian museums, such as the long-term
Islands to Ice exhibition at the Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery and the National
Antarctic Heritage Collection at the National Museum of Australia
• public awareness through media engagement about science activities in Antarctica
and the Southern Ocean, life on Antarctic stations and expeditioner recruitment
• creative engagement through the Australian Antarctic Arts Fellowship which provides
opportunities for artists and creative professionals to experience Antarctica and
produce works that increase awareness and deepen audiences’ understanding of
Antarctica and Australia’s role in the region.
The Government will continue engaging in this important work.
