Australian Government response to the
Senate Education and Employment Legislation Committee
report:
Education Services for Overseas Students Amendment
(Quality and Integrity) Bill 2024 [Provisions]
May 2026
Overview
The international education sector is important to Australia, and the Australian
Government remains committed to ensuring its quality and integrity.
The Senate Standing Committee on Education and Employment’s final report on the inquiry
into the Education Services for Overseas Students Amendment (Quality and Integrity) Bill
2024 (ESOS Bill) made 8 recommendations.
The Australian Greens provided a dissenting report with 4 recommendations. Senator David
Pocock provided additional comments with 18 recommendations.
Following the Senate Inquiry, the ESOS Bill lapsed on 28 March 2025 when Parliament was
prorogued.
Government response
The Australian Government considered the recommendations contained in the Committee’s
report and on 9 October 2025, the Minister for Education, the Hon Jason Clare MP,
introduced an amended omnibus Bill, the Education Legislation Amendment (Integrity and
Other Measures) Bill 2025 (ELA Bill). The ELA Bill featured many of the same measures as
the ESOS Bill. Recommendations contained in the Committee’s report informed the drafting
of the Bill, which was passed by Parliament on 28 November 2025. The Education
Legislation Amendment (Integrity and Other Measures) Act 2025 (ELA Act) received Royal
Assent on 5 December 2025.
While it is not a requirement to respond to recommendations to pass, not pass, or amend a
Bill, the Australian Government has responded to all recommendations.
Recommendations of the Committee
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the bill be passed.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation, further noting that the ESOS Bill
lapsed on 28 March 2025.
Recommendations 2-6 (relating to Part 7 – Enrolment limits)
2. The committee recommends that the bill be amended to remove the ability for the
Minister to set course-level limits for Table A and B universities and TAFE providers.
3. The committee recommends that the bill be amended to exempt specific classes of
students, including by citizenship, from enrolment limits in instruments and notices.
4. The committee recommends that the bill be amended to require the Minister to consult
ESOS agencies and Immigration Minister before setting limits.
5. The committee recommends that the bill be amended to require the Minister to consult
providers before setting future limits. The Minister should only be required to consult
with providers on the initial setting of enrolment limits each year, without the process
being duplicated in the event there is a reallocation of student places throughout the
year.
6. The committee recommends that Part 7 of the bill be amended to change ‘notices’ to
‘notifiable instruments.’
7. The deadline for instruments made under the Bill should be changed from 1 September
of the year before the first year to which the instrument applies, to the 1 July of the year
before the first year to which the instrument applies.
The Australian Government notes these recommendations.
These recommendations have been acquitted on the basis that they are proposed
amendments to the legislation.
Following the lapse of the ESOS Bill on 28 March 2025, the Hon Jason Clare MP, Minister for
Education, introduced an amended omnibus Bill, the ELA Bill, which was passed by
Parliament and received Royal Assent on 5 December 2025. Part 7 (Enrolment limits) of the
ESOS Bill 2024 was not included in the ELA Bill.
Recommendation 8
The committee recommends that Ministerial Direction 107 be removed upon royal assent
to the legislative amendments.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
As announced on the Department of Home Affairs website, Ministerial Direction 107
(MD107) was revoked on 18 December 2024. It was replaced with Ministerial Direction
111 (MD111), which commenced on 19 December 2024. Subsequently, MD111
was replaced by Ministerial Direction 115 (MD115) with effect from 14 November 2025.
Recommendations of the Australian Greens
Recommendation 1
That this Bill not be passed unless Part 7 and 8 of the Bill are removed.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation, further noting that the ESOS Bill
2024 lapsed on 28 March 2025.
The Hon Jason Clare MP, Minister for Education, introduced an amended omnibus Bill, the
ELA Bill, which was passed by Parliament and received Royal Assent on 5 December 2025.
Part 7 (Enrolment limits) of the ESOS Bill 2024 was not included in the ELA Bill.
Recommendation 2
That Ministerial Direction 107 be revoked immediately and not be contingent on the
passage of the government’s legislation to cap international student numbers.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
As outlined in the response to Committee Recommendation 8, Ministerial Direction 107
(MD107) was revoked on 18 December 2024 and replaced by subsequent Ministerial
Directions.
Recommendation 3
That the government withdraw this Bill, go back to the drawing board and properly
consult with the tertiary education sector to develop a plan which is sustainable rather
than a rushed reckless migration policy.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
Following the lapse of the 2024 ESOS Bill on 28 March 2025, the Hon Jason Clare MP,
Minister for Education, introduced an amended omnibus Bill, the ELA Bill, which was passed
by Parliament and received Royal Assent on 5 December 2025.
Recommendation 4
That university funding be increased to fully and properly funded learning, teaching and
research.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
Recommendation 40 of the Australian Universities Accord’s Final Report proposed the
introduction of a new funding system to be planned and managed by an Australian Tertiary
Education Commission (ATEC).
The Universities Accord (Australian Tertiary Education Commission) Bill 2025 establishing
the ATEC passed Parliament on 31 March 2026.
Recommendations of Senator David Pocock
Recommendations 1-12 and 14-15 (relating to Part 7 – Enrolment limits)
1. Delay commencement of Parts 7 & 8 of the Bill to 1 January 2026 to enable an orderly
transition without further damaging Australia’s international reputation and the longevity
of our international education sector.
2. Include ‘sunset provisions’ in relation to the Minister’s powers so that they sunset at
the sooner of two years, or when a relevant Mission Based Compact entered into.
3. Amend the Bill to require the use of formulas and rules in the legislative instrument and
remove the power to cap providers or vary legislative instruments independently of the
Parliament. Establish legislated criteria for setting caps and require the Minister to
provide and publish a statement of reasons for each cap.
4. Insert a provision creating an independent process for providers to challenge and/or
request a formal review of any cap they are given.
5. Set a floor on the annual international student caps to give providers a minimum level
of certainty to plan their budgets. The floor is proposed to be a cap that is not more than
15% lower than the previous year’s cap or the average of the previous three calendar
years, whichever is higher.
6. Amend the breach provisions, so that they are more proportionate, and so that
suspensions are not automatically triggered for minor breaches. Include a range in the
international student cap allocations to each institution to provide flexibility and minimise
unintentional breaches of the cap. Include at least one warning of potential breaches prior
to penalties being enforced.
7. Insert a provision that annual international student cap limits must be provided no later
than 1 July of the preceding year and be publicly notified.
8. Require the formula for setting caps to take into account the provision of existing
student accommodation, including any arrangements through third party providers.
9. Remove the Minister’s power to set caps at a course level.
10. Provide clarity to providers around the priority categories of students to be excluded
from the caps including postgraduate research students, exchange/study abroad/mobility
students, and students in transnational education (TNE) programs.
11. Require the Minister to consult with a registered provider before determining a limit
for that provider.
12. Insert a new provision requiring the government to maintain a public register of all
notifications provided. Notifications to providers should be directed to be immediately
included in the register.
14. Better define enrolment for the purposes of setting annual international student caps.
15. In consultation with stakeholders, develop and legislate a workable system for
reallocating unused places.
The Australian Government notes these recommendations.
These recommendations have been acquitted on the basis that they are proposed
amendments to the legislation.
Following the lapse of the ESOS Bill on 28 March 2025, the Hon Jason Clare MP, Minister for
Education, introduced an amended omnibus Bill, the ELA Bill, which was passed by
Parliament and received Royal Assent on 5 December 2025. Part 7 (Enrolment limits) of the
ESOS Bill 2024 was not included in the ELA Bill.
Recommendation 13
Amend the definition of education agent to make it clear that an agent is an entity that
engages in the specified activities in relation to a provider in exchange for a commission,
and that is listed in the PRISMS system.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
This recommendation has been acquitted on the basis that it is a proposed amendment to
the legislation. The proposed definition of ‘education agent’ in the ESOS Bill was carried
forward as a measure in the ELA Bill, which was passed by Parliament and received Royal
Assent on 5 December 2025.
The new definition supports transparency of provider-education agent relationships and
integrity in the international education sector by giving a clearer and more comprehensive
definition of ‘education agent’.
Basing the definition of education agent on the activities performed in relation to a provider
more accurately reflects the interactions, including financial, between providers and
education agents.
Recommendation 16
Narrow the reasons why the Minister can suspend or cancel a course to those with
systemic integrity issues.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
This recommendation has been acquitted on the basis that it is a proposed amendment to
the legislation. The measure to give the Minister the power to suspend and cancel courses,
as per Part 8 of the ESOS Bill, was carried forward in the ELA Bill. This measure will help
remove courses where there is a demonstrated poor or low quality of delivery or where the
courses are being used to subvert student visa conditions.
Recommendation 17
Ensure the legislation allows new independent higher education providers to enter the
market with appropriate quality and integrity safeguards.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
This recommendation has been acquitted on the basis that it is a proposed amendment to
the legislation.
Following the lapse of the ESOS Bill on 28 March 2025, the Hon Jason Clare MP, Minister for
Education, introduced an amended omnibus Bill, the ELA Bill, which was passed by
Parliament and received Royal Assent on 5 December 2025. The ELA Bill includes a range of
measures to strengthen the quality, integrity and sustainability of the delivery of education
in Australia.
Recommendation 18
The government should develop a national plan for population and immigration that sets
specific targets through consultation with Australians and consideration of impacts on
housing accessibility and affordability, infrastructure, the environment and water, and our
priority work skills needed.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
On 11 December 2023, the Australian Government released its Migration Strategy.
The Migration Strategy was informed by extensive consultation with business, unions and
other stakeholders, and more than 450 submissions received as part of the 2023 Review of
the Migration System.
