OFFICIAL
Australian Government response to the House
of Representatives Standing Committee on
Social Policy and Legal Affairs Inquiry report:
You win some, you lose more: Online gambling and
its impacts on those experiencing gambling harm
May 2026
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Acknowledgement of Country
The Australian Government acknowledges Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples throughout
Australia and their continuing connection to land, water, culture and community, and pay our
respects to Elders past and present.
Help and support
Support is available for people experiencing gambling harm.
Gambling Help Online
For free and confidential support visit Gambling Help Online at www.gamblinghelponline.org.au
to find out more about online counselling, live chat and email support, self-help advice and
information. This support is available to anyone experiencing harm and anyone concerned about
a friend or family member.
Telephone support
You can get immediate assistance by calling the National Gambling Helpline on 1800 858 858 for
free, professional and confidential support 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
Financial counselling
Financial counselling is available to support people affected by gambling harm. Visit the
Department of Social Services’ webpage www.dss.gov.au/financialcounselling for more information.
BetStop - the National Self-Exclusion Register
BetStop - the National Self-Exclusion Register lets you exclude yourself from all Australian licensed
online and phone wagering services in a single step for a minimum of 3 months and up to a lifetime.
Registering is quick and easy. All you need is a mobile phone number, email address and
an Australian driver’s licence, a Medicare card or a passport.
The service is free, and your personal details will be protected.
Visit www.betstop.gov.au for more information.
2
OFFICIAL
Introduction
The Australian Government takes its responsibility to protect Australians from online gambling harm
seriously.
The Government welcomes the report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee
on Social Policy and Legal Affairs (the Committee) Inquiry into online gambling and its impacts on
those experiencing gambling harm (the Online Gambling Inquiry).
The Online Gambling Inquiry was established following a referral by then Minister for Social Services,
the Hon Amanda Rishworth MP. The Committee, chaired by the late Ms Peta Murphy MP, examined
whether current laws, regulations, consumer protections, education and support programs are
sufficient at reducing online gambling harm.
The Government thanks the Committee members for their dedication and professionalism
throughout the Inquiry and acknowledges the late Peta Murphy’s courageous and tireless advocacy
to reduce online gambling harm, including in her capacity as chair of the Committee.
The Committee received 161 submissions, 26 exhibits and held 13 public hearings. The Government
acknowledges all those who took the time to make a submission or appeared before the Committee
as witnesses. In particular, we recognise those people with the lived experience of gambling harm
for sharing their personal experiences with the Committee and supporting its work.
Based on this evidence and testimony, the Committee’s report highlighted the substantial harm that
online gambling can cause to individuals and families and made 31 wide-ranging recommendations
to address online gambling harms.
Gambling harm is a significant public health concern. Queensland Treasury data shows that
Australians lost over $32 billion on legal forms of gambling in 2023-24, representing the highest
losses per capita in the world of around $1,521 per adult. Research by the Australian Institute of
Family Studies found that in 2024, 15 per cent of Australian adults were experiencing or at risk of
experiencing gambling harm.
The impact of gambling harm is felt throughout the community, where for every individual
at high risk of gambling harm, up to 6 other individuals can be affected.1 Gambling harm can span
many aspects of an individual’s life, including finances, relationships, emotional and psychological
issues, physical health, work and study performance. Research commissioned by the Victorian
Government estimates the social cost of gambling in Victoria was $14.1 billion in 2023 alone,
comprising adverse financial, emotional and psychological costs, relationship and family impacts,
and productivity loss.
The Government is taking strong action to protect Australians, particularly children and young
people, from the harms of online gambling. On 2 April 2026, the Government announced a package
of measures that address key themes of the Committee’s report and set the Government’s forward
agenda to reduce online gambling harms in Australia. The details of these measures are outlined
in this response. These strong actions build on the work the Government has already delivered,
including key measures implemented in partnership with the states and territories to reduce online
gambling harms through the National Consumer Protection Framework for Online Wagering
(the National Framework).
1 Goodwin, B. C., Browne, M., Rockloff, M., & Rose, J. (2017). A typical problem gambler affects six
others. International Gambling Studies, 17(2), 276–289.
3
OFFICIAL
Australian Government response
The Government notes the 31 recommendations made by the Committee. The Government
announced a package of gambling reforms on 2 April 2026, to better protect Australians from the
harms of online gambling. These reforms were informed by the work of the Committee and
a number of these measures also build on what was proposed in the Online Gambling Inquiry report,
in response to new and emerging challenges.
A number of recommendations made by the committee relate to policy within the responsibility of
States and Territories. The Australian Government calls on States and Territories to examine the
recommendations of the committee and respond accordingly.
The Government’s package includes:
• restricting wagering advertising
• boosting enforcement action against illegal online gambling services
• strengthening the operation of BetStop – the National Self-Exclusion Register (BetStop)
• addressing harmful and emerging online lottery products
• doubling financial counselling support for gambling, and
• increasing public awareness of online gambling harms targeted to those most at risk.
The Government will also make match-fixing criminal offences consistent across Australia, improving
the integrity of Australian sport and lessening its appeal as a target for criminal infiltration.
The Government will develop legislation to implement these measures where required, with the
reforms to begin from 1 January 2027. Further details will be refined through the legislative drafting
process, which will include consultation with relevant stakeholders.
These reforms build on the significant measures already delivered to reduce online gambling harms,
including: introducing new evidence-based taglines in March 2023; launching BetStop
in August 2023; banning the use of credit cards and other credit-related products for online
wagering in June 2024, and introducing mandatory minimum classifications for gambling-like
content, including loot boxes and simulated gambling in computer games in September 2024.
Restricting wagering advertising
The Government acknowledges the widespread concern across the Australian community about the
volume of, and harm associated with, wagering advertisements on television, radio, online and
outdoor platforms.
The Government is taking action to address the prevalence and saturation of wagering advertising,
with a focus on minimising the dangers of exposing children and vulnerable people to wagering
advertisements. The Government’s reforms represent a balanced approach while targeting key
community concerns around the proliferation of wagering advertising. These reforms will:
• address the saturation and targeting of wagering advertising
• break the link between sports and online wagering, and
• protect children and vulnerable people from the harms of wagering advertising.
4
OFFICIAL
The Government’s comprehensive package of wagering advertising reforms will:
• ban all wagering advertising during live sporting events on broadcast channels between
6:00am and 8:30pm
• ban all wagering advertising in sports venues and on players’ and officials’ uniforms
• restrict all wagering advertising on broadcast television to no more than 3 wagering
advertisements per hour per channel between 6:00am and 8:30pm
• ban all wagering advertising on broadcast radio during school drop-off (8:00-9:00am) and
pick-up (3:00-4:00pm) hours
• ban all wagering advertising on online platforms, except where users are logged in, are
18 years or older, and have not opted out of such advertising (triple lock functionality), and
• ban the use of notable people (including celebrities and athletes) and the promotion of odds
in wagering advertising.
Consistent with the Online Gambling Inquiry, dedicated racing channels, programs, and racetracks
(e.g. racing.com, racing programs and telecasts) will be exempt from the proposed reforms
in recognition of the intrinsic link between racing and wagering activities. Dedicated betting websites
and venues (e.g. TAB outlets) will also be exempt.
These reforms will be implemented through legislative amendment to the Interactive Gambling Act
2001 (IGA) and will commence from 1 January 2027. This approach will provide strong legislative
backing for the new restrictions and strong penalties for non-compliance.
The Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA) will be responsible for enforcing
compliance with these restrictions.
Boosting enforcement action against illegal online gambling services
The Government acknowledges that illegal online gambling services present a risk to the community,
as they are unlikely to have consumer protections, pay no Australian taxes, racing or sports fees, and
can be used for money laundering or match fixing purposes. The illegal offshore gambling market
in Australia is growing faster than the licenced and regulated onshore market and is expected to be
valued at $5 billion by 2029.
The IGA prohibits the provision and advertising of illegal online gambling services to Australians,
including offshore wagering services. Strong penalties apply for the provision of these services
to persons located in Australia.
The ACMA already has the tools to block these websites from operating and has blocked over 1,500
sites since this work commenced. However, the regulatory requirements are onerous and prohibit
the ACMA from being able to investigate and respond rapidly.
The Government will boost enforcement against illegal online gambling services to stop these sites
from operating within Australia, but outside of Australia’s laws and consumer protections.
To do this, the Government will:
• work with Australia’s banking sector to enable them to block financial transactions between
Australian bank accounts and illegal gambling operators
• streamline, automate and extend the scope of the ACMA’s website blocking scheme
to include additional internet service providers and alternate domain name system
providers, and
• extend the scope of the existing ban on advertising illegal online gambling services
to capture social media sites and require hosting services and digital platforms to take down
illegal content.
5
OFFICIAL
These measures seek to reduce the adverse effects of illegal online gambling on Australians, noting
illegal gambling operators are unregulated and operate outside of Australian consumer protection
mechanisms, including BetStop, mandatory customer pre-verification and the credit card payment
ban.
These additional disruptions are also intended to deter potential illegal operators from entering the
Australian market, leading to a reduction in illegal gambling activities over the long-term.
Strengthening the operation of BetStop
BetStop allows Australians to self-exclude from all Australian licensed online and phone wagering
providers, who primarily offer online sports and race betting services, for a minimum period
of 3 months, up to a lifetime. Between launching in August 2023 and April 2026, over 60,000
Australians had registered to self-exclude and there were over 37,000 active registrations.
The IGA required a review of BetStop after 12 months of operation and the Government tabled the
final report of the Statutory Review of BetStop (the Review) on 25 February 2026.
The Review found that BetStop is a successful policy and is delivering well on its objectives.
It identified several areas where changes could optimise BetStop’s role in addressing gambling harm.
The Government will take action to strengthen BetStop in line with the outcomes of the Review.
This will include increasing promotion of BetStop to support increased take up of the service,
through an advertising campaign and phased funding for the ACMA to increase its ongoing
marketing, promotion and education efforts after the campaign concludes.
The Government will also commission market research to investigate the feasibility and options for
embedding BetStop in existing gambling taglines and call to action messages, which wagering
providers are required to include alongside their advertisements (e.g. ‘Chances are you’re about
to lose - For free and confidential support call 1800 858 858 or visit gamblinghelponline.org.au’).
In line with review recommendations, several amendments to the IGA will be progressed to enhance
clarity and improve user experience and safety outcomes. The ACMA will also progress necessary
system updates and increase compliance efforts to strengthen BetStop.
Legislative amendments to cost recovery arrangements will also be progressed to ensure that all
measures to strengthen the system will be cost-recovered from industry.
The Government will consult with states, territories and other stakeholders ahead of implementing
legislative changes.
Addressing harmful and emerging online lottery products
New online gambling and lottery products are being offered and promoted to Australian consumers
that are contrary to the intent and spirit of the IGA, with some products now operating in a ‘grey’
regulatory space, without appropriate consumer protection mechanisms in place.
Online keno
Online keno services have evolved from traditional keno and are now offered as a highly repetitive,
rapid play gambling product, with high spend limits and high frequency ‘draws’, with some offerings
allowing consumers to spend up to $1,000 every 3 minutes.
Online keno is being marketed aggressively, with the advertising spend almost doubling between
2023 and 2024. This product has also been exempted from consumer protection measures
implemented in recent years, including the credit card ban and BetStop. It is also exempt from
gambling advertising rules.
6
OFFICIAL
Recognising this as a significant danger to the Australian community, the Government will ban all
online keno, including for current operators. This change is consistent with the intent of the IGA
to limit online gambling products that can lead to harmful gambling and will ensure consistent
treatment of this product with online casino games, including online poker machines and online
poker, which are also banned under the IGA.
The Government will consult with states, territories and industry ahead of implementing legislative
changes to ban online keno.
Foreign-matched lotteries
Foreign-matched lotteries are an emerging product which allow consumers to access international
multi-million dollar lottery draws multiple times a week, when they would otherwise be ineligible
to do so. Foreign-matched lotteries are an ‘excluded lottery service’ in the IGA, and as a result are
exempt from existing consumer protection mechanisms.
The Government will undertake consultation with states, territories and industry to scope and
implement legislative changes that enhance protections against foreign-matched lotteries.
Trade promotion lotteries
Many organisations in Australia offer ‘rewards club’ or loyalty programs. However, there are
emerging concerns that some rewards club operators are exploiting regulatory gaps to offer lottery
products under the guise of ‘trade promotions’. These ‘shadow lottery products’ involve operators
selling memberships at a monthly fee and are structured around frequent prize giveaways via
lottery-style draws. Prizes typically include items of high value such as cars, houses or significant
sums of money.
While defined in the IGA, trade promotion gambling services are unregulated at the Commonwealth
level. Again, this means that consumer protections established under the IGA do not apply to these
services.
The Government will work with states and territories to examine the exemptions currently afforded
to rewards club activities and introduce regulatory changes to support national regulation of these
products, including to ensure there are appropriate consumer protections. This will include explicit
definitions for a lottery product.
Credit card ban
To strengthen protections against online gambling harms for vulnerable Australians, in June 2024
the Government legislated a ban on the use of credit cards, credit-related products (such as digital
wallets) and digital currency (such as cryptocurrency) as payment methods for online wagering.
This change has aligned online wagering with land-based gambling regulations, where credit card
use was already banned.
The Minister for Communications is also able to make legislative instruments to extend this ban
to new types of credit products that may be introduced to the market over time. This will enable
an expedient response to address problematic payment methods that may become available in the
future.
A statutory review of the credit card ban is due to commence in June 2026 and will consider the
effectiveness of the ban since its implementation, and ensure the ban is operating as intended.
7
OFFICIAL
Expanding financial counselling support for gambling
Financial counselling services are seeing the increasingly complex and far-reaching impacts
of gambling harm. The Government recognises there is a need for more investment in prevention
and early intervention programs alongside the upskilling of qualified staff to increase the availability
of specialist services.
To further support those who are experiencing gambling harm, the Government will expand the
reach and availability of Commonwealth-funded financial counselling services under the Financial
Counselling for Gambling program. This program provides specialised financial counselling services
for people who are experiencing financial hardship as a result of gambling harm, and supports them
to make informed choices and build long-term financial capability. This expansion will increase the
accessibility of services, including in new locations, doubling the number of people already
supported through this program each year.
Funding for targeted community education initiatives will also increase awareness of gambling harm,
from any form of gambling, and seek to build workforce capability through scholarships and training
to support the longer-term sustainability of the financial counselling workforce, including specialist
gambling financial counsellors.
Increasing public awareness of online gambling harms
Evidence shows the number of Australians at risk of gambling harm is increasing and a lack
of awareness and stigma are barriers to help-seeking.
The Government recognises that increasing awareness of the harms of online gambling, alongside
improved access to support, can strengthen harm-minimisation efforts nationwide.
A national online gambling digital public awareness and education campaign will help drive greater
understanding of the risks and harms of online gambling and seek to counter the harmful messages
of gambling advertising.
The Government will fund a national online gambling public awareness and education campaign,
informed by research and focused primarily on those at greatest risk, which are anticipated to be
young men (aged 18-34), First Nations and Culturally and Linguistically Diverse communities.
The campaign will communicate the risks and harms of gambling, encourage safer gambling
behaviours, promote help-seeking and reduce stigma associated with gambling harm.
Making match-fixing criminal offences consistent across Australia
Illegal offshore gambling sites do not participate in Australia’s sporting integrity arrangements,
raising further risks of match fixing and competition manipulation.
The Government will progress work to define match fixing as an offence under the Commonwealth
Criminal Code, consistent with our commitment under the Council of Europe Convention on the
Manipulation of Sports Competitions (Macolin Convention).
This change will provide the Government with the power to investigate and prosecute the corrupt
manipulation of Australian sporting competitions.
In addition to direct benefits for the integrity of domestic sporting competitions, these changes have
the potential to reduce gambling harm through hardening of sport as a target for criminal
infiltration.
8
OFFICIAL
Mandatory minimum classifications for gambling-like content
On 23 September 2023, the Government announced the introduction of new mandatory minimum
classifications for computer games containing gambling-like content, in particular simulated
gambling or paid loot boxes. These changes aim to protect children and young people from potential
harms associated with exposure to gambling-like content.
The new mandatory minimum classifications came into force in September 2024 and introduced
a classification of:
• R18+ (Restricted) for games with ‘simulated gambling’, which legally restricts access
to persons aged 18 and over, aligning with age restrictions for real-world gambling, and
• M (Mature) rating for games containing ‘loot boxes’ that can be purchased, which
highlights the risks that parents and carers should consider before allowing children in their
care to engage with them.
All games classified after 22 September 2024 that contain simulated gambling are also required
to display consumer advice of ‘high impact simulated gambling’.
In addition, the Classification Board has updated their consumer advice so that games that contain
paid loot boxes and other in-game purchases linked to elements of chance will display consumer
advice of ‘chance-based in-game purchases’.
9
