Australian Government

Australian Government response to the
House of Representatives
Standing Committee on Industry, Innovation and
Science report:

Food for Thought:
The opportunities and challenges for Australia's food and
beverage manufacturing industry

MARCH 2026

This page intentionally left blank

Contents

GLOSSALY 0... cc ccccccc esc ce nce e eee eee e eee ee en ee eee e ee ee esas ee ee eee es eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeasees 3
INTFOCUCTION 00.0... cece eee ce eee ce nce e nce nceeencee ences eneeeenceaeneeeeeeesensesenseeenseeeeseeeeseeeeees 5
Committee RECOMMENAATIONS.......... cc eece eee eee ec ece eee ee eee eceeeeeeeeeeeaeneeeeeeeeseeeeees 6
RECOMMENCATION 1 20.0... eee eee eee e eee ce eee cee nee ne eect ee ence eeeeeeeeeeeens ees eeeeeteeeeeeeeneens 6
RECOMMENAATION 2 2... ceceecece see e sete nsec ene eee ee eee ee eee eee ee eases esses eae ee eee eeeeeeeeeeenees 6
RECOMMENCATION 8 ....... eee eee ec eect cence eee e eee ne eect eee ee eee eeeeeeeeneene teases eeeeeeeeeeeneees 7
RECOMMENCATION G 1.0... eee e cee cc eee n cence eee nee ne eee eee eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeeeteeeeeeeeneees 9
RECOMMENCATION 5 2... eee cece cence eee cee nce ne ence eee eeeeeeeeceeeeeeneeeaeeeeeseeneeeeeees 10
RECOMMENTATION 6 2... ... ce ceecece sc eee nc eee nee e nee ee eens eens sees eens eeeeeene tees eeeeseeeenees 11
RECOMMENAATION 7 1.0... eee eee cece eee ec eee ence teens ence es eeeeeseeseeneeneeeeeeseeseeeeeeenes 12
RECOMMENAATION B 2... eee e ccc ce een cece eee neces ene eee eee eeeeeeeeeeeneenseeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 13
RECOMMENAATION Q 1... 0... eee eee e eee ce eee e cee nce ne eect eee ec eee eeeceeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeenes 14
RECOMMENAATION 10......... cece eceee ec eee nee e neces eens eens eases esses eeeeeeneeeeeseneeseneeaees 15
RECOMMENCAATION 11........ eee eee ee eee e eee ce eect nee ee eee ees eee eeeeseeeeeneeeseeseeeeeeeeenes 16
RECOMMENAATION 12......... ccc cc ccc ece nce e cence ence nee ee ence eee eeeeeeeeeeesene ees eneeeeeeeeeeeaes 17
RECOMMENAATION 13.2.2... eee eee cece cence eee e eee ne eect eee ee eee eeeceseeneeneeeeeeceeseeeeeeeeees 18
RECOMMENAATION 14.0.0... cece ece eee eee nce e nee eeeceeeeeeeeeaeee esses eeeeseseeseeseneeseneesees 18
RECOMMENCAATION 15.0... eee cece cence eee e eee ee ence eee ee ees eeeeeeeeeneene ees eeseeseeeeeeeeees 19
RECOMMENAATION 16..........s cece eceeencee nce e nc eee eens eens eases esses eneeseneeeeseneeseeeeaees 20
RECOMMENCATION 17.2.1... cece ec ence cence eee e cence ence eee ec eee eeeeeeceeeeeeenseeseeeeeeeeeeeeeees 20
RECOMMENCATION 18......... ccc cc ecc een cece eee ec enc eee eeceeseeeeeeceeeeneenseeteeeeeeeneeeeaes 20
RECOMMENATION 19....... cece eee ce eee e eee ce eect nee ee eee e eee eeeeeeeeeeee ene ees eee eeeeeeeeeeees 21
RECOMMENAATION 20........ ccs ceceecece nce e nce e neces eens eens esses esses eeeeseeeeeeeseneeseneenees 22
RECOMMENAATION 21...... oe eee ee eee e eee ce eect nee ee eect ee eee eeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeaes 22
RECOMMENCATION 22.0.2... eee cc ccc eee nce ec cece enc enc eee eec eee eeeeeeceeeeneenseeseeeeeteeneeeenes 23
RECOMMENAATION 23.2... eee eee e eee ce eee ece eect nee ee tect eee eeeeeceseeeeeneeeseeeeeeeeeeeetees 23

This page intentionally left blank

Glossary

Agritech
Al

ARM
ASEAN
Austrade
CRC
CSIRO
DAFF
DCCEEW
DFAT
DISR
EMDG
EFWA
FaBA
FSANZ
IBA

IGP

IP

Joint food
regulatory
system

JSA
JSC
NCD

NIAA

Agricultural technology.

Artificial intelligence.

Advanced Robotics for Manufacturing.

Association of Southeast Asian Nations.

Australian Trade and Investment Commission.

Cooperative Research Centres.

Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation.
Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry.

Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water.
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

Department of Industry, Science and Resources.

Export Market Development Grant program.

End Food Waste Australia.

Food and Beverage Accelerator Initiative.

Food Standards Australia New Zealand.

Indigenous Business Australia.

Industry Growth Program.

Intellectual property.

The Australian, New Zealand and state and territory governments
work together to make food laws and standards, and ensure they are
consistently enforced.

Jobs and Skills Australia.
Jobs and Skills Councils.
Non-communicable disease.

National Indigenous Australians Agency.

NRF
NRFC
R&DTI
SME

the
Committee

the Report

VET

National Reconstruction Fund.

National Reconstruction Fund Corporation.
Research and Development Tax Incentive.
Small and medium-sized enterprises.

House of Representatives Standing Committee on Industry,
Innovation and Science.

The report from the House of Representatives Committee on
Industry, Innovation and Science: ‘Food for Thought The
opportunities and challenges for Australia's food and beverage
manufacturing industry’.

Vocational Education and Training.

Introduction

The Albanese Labor Government is investing in a Future Made in Australia, maximising
the economic and industrial benefits of the global net zero transition and securing
Australia’s place in a changing international economic and strategic landscape.

Its $22.7 billion commitment to a Future Made in Australia is attracting and enabling
investment, backing Australian ideas and investing in the people, communities and
services that will drive our national success.

The Australian Government recognises the vital contribution of Australia’s food and
beverage manufacturing sector in transforming Australia’s premium agricultural
produce into high-value goods —from quality meats and dairy to confectionery and craft
beverages. Enhancing the value of agricultural output is a national priority, with the
food and beverage sector central to this. As a net food exporter, strengthening this
sector not only helps to ensure long-term food security for communities across the
country but also supports Australia’s prosperity.

On 18 March 2024, the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Industry,
Innovation and Science (‘the committee’) commenced an inquiry into food and
beverage manufacturing in Australia. The terms of reference for the inquiry focused on
opportunities for expanding innovation and value-adding in the food and beverage
manufacturing industry in Australia. The committee tabled its report, Food for Thought:
The opportunities and challenges for Australia's food and beverage manufacturing
industry (‘the report’) in February 2025 and made 23 recommendations.

The Government agrees or agrees in principle to 15 recommendations and notes the
remaining 8 recommendations, in which it is already pursuing initiatives that align with
their intent. In addition to its investment in a Future Made in Australia, the $15 billion
National Reconstruction Fund and the Industry Growth Program include value-adding in
agriculture as a priority. The Government is also developing a new national food
security strategy, Feeding Australia, to improve the food system in Australia.

The Australian Government thanks the committee and secretariat for its work to
produce the report. The Australian Government also thanks all stakeholders who
contributed to the inquiry and their ongoing commitment to help Australia’s food and
beverage manufacturing sector grow.

Committee Recommendations

Recommendation 1

Recommendation 1: The committee recommends that the Australian Government
develop a National Food Plan for Australia, which includes:

e clear objectives
e defined outcomes
e measurable targets

The National Food Plan should be developed in consultation with state/territory and
local governments, along with relevant sectors, stakeholders, and the community.

Response: The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.

The Australian Government has committed $3.5 million over 2 years from 1 July 2025 to
develop Feeding Australia: A National Food Security Strategy. This recognises
increasing pressures from risks such as climate change, biosecurity threats,
geopolitical instability, and supply chain vulnerabilities. Feeding Australia will set outa
long-term plan to boost the productivity, resilience and security of Australia’s
agriculture and food production systems to ensure our food system can face the
challenges ahead.

Feeding Australia is being developed in consultation with industry, community, and
government, supported by a National Food Council made up of experts from across the
food ecosystem. The strategy will build on recommendations in the House Standing
Committee on Agriculture report Australian Food Story: Feeding the Nation and Beyond,
and complement other initiatives, such as the Agriculture and Land Sector Plan, the
National Freight and Supply Chain Strategy, Australia’s Circular Economy Framework,
and the National Strategy for Food Security in Remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Communities.

Recommendation 2

Recommendation 2: The committee recommends that the Australian Government,
through a cross-governmental approach, acknowledge and address the linkages
between agri-food production and nutrition and health to minimise the impact of
non-communicable diseases.

Response: The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.

The Government recognises the link between agri-food production, nutrition, and
health and is addressing this through a coordinated, cross-portfolio approach. The
National Preventative Health Strategy 2021-2030 (NPHS) and the National Obesity
Strategy 2022-2032 (NOS) provide a strategic framework to promote healthier food
systems and improve dietary health and reduce non-communicable diseases.
One current initiative designed to make processed food and drink healthier is the

Healthy Food Partnership Program. This voluntary program works with the food industry
and public health sector to encourage food companies to make positive changes to
their product portfolio, including reformulating processed foods to reduce sugar,
saturated fat and sodium, and to offer more suitable serving sizes. Progress of these
strategies is tracked via the National Preventative Health Monitoring Dashboard,
published by the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare in 2024.

The National Strategy for Food Security in Remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Communities is supporting increased agri-food production within remote First Nations
communities. It aims to increase access to both traditional and non-traditional healthy
foods by working in partnership with the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Community Controlled Sector. This work aligns with Closing the Gap Priority Reform 1:
Formal partnerships and shared decision making, as well as Priority Reform 2: Building
the community-controlled sector.

The joint Australia and New Zealand food regulation system also plays a critical role in
safeguarding public health and safety. It is a collaborative effort across the health,
agriculture, and primary industry sectors in Australia and New Zealand. The system is
overseen by the Food Ministers’ Meeting, supported by a senior official’s group and an
implementation committee. These cross-jurisdictional bodies work together to protect
consumer health and safety, enable informed food choices and support public health
outcomes. The bodies aim to foster a strong, sustainable food industry that delivers a
diverse and affordable food supply and provides economic benefits for Australia and
New Zealand. The system’s workplan is structured to promote a healthy food supply,
ensure food is safe and suitable, empower consumers, and support thriving food
economies.

Together, these initiatives reflect the Government’s commitment to a
whole-of-government approach that strengthens the link between food systems and
health and supports improved nutrition to reduce the burden of non-communicable
diseases.

Recommendation 3

Recommendation 3: The committee recommends that the Australian Government
provide increased Austrade assistance for small and medium enterprises looking to
export Australian food and beverage products to Asia.

Response: The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.

Recognising that nearly two-thirds of Australia’s agricultural production is exported, the
Government actively works to secure and expand market access, helping producers
remain globally competitive.

Austrade provides services to Australian businesses, including smalland
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), to help them grow and diversify their exports,
including in high-growth markets and free trade agreement (FTA) markets. Austrade is
also delivering the Southeast Asia and South Asia Business Exchange (SEABX and
SABX) Programs that are highlighting export and investment opportunities in these
high-potential regions. Austrade provides advice, connections and practical support

that assists export-ready food and beverage manufacturers achieve their
internationalisation objectives.

Austrade partners with peak industry bodies and state and territory governments to
deliver global events which enhance Australia’s international brand and enable
exporters to connect with buyers and form business partnerships. Austrade’s Go
Global Toolkit contains valuable information and resources to support the development
and delivery of export plans. Austrade also administers the Export Market Development
Grants (EMDG) program, which supports SMEs to deliver marketing and promotional
activities to increase their exports and bring broader benefits for Australia.

Further, in response to an increasing level of global economic uncertainty, the
Australian Government launched the Accessing New Markets Initiative (ANMI).
Managed by Austrade, in close collaboration with national peak industry bodies, ANMI
is a $50 million, 2-year surge program aimed at helping Australian exporters from
diverse sectors, including agrifood, by building the resilience and diversification of
Australia’s exports. ANMI will support additional in-market trade advisors, enhanced
offshore events, and new strategic initiatives. By strengthening relationships with
industry and working across government, ANMI aims to deliver enduring export
outcomes, build long-term trade resilience and grow export opportunities for Australian
businesses, including from the agrifood sector.

The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry (DAFF) also helps to create new
and maintain existing export market access opportunities for agricultural and food
industries. DAFF’s network of overseas counsellors, spanning 15 international
locations, provides critical in-country support to exporting businesses. DAFF also
continuously works to maintain technical market access, such as restoring access for
live rock lobster trade to China and maintaining access to the EU for products impacted
by the EU Deforestation Regulation. The Government continues to invest in enabling
and protecting international market access for agricultural goods. It represents
Australia’s agriculturalinterests overseas and promotes global standards for free and
fair trade that support Australia’s economic prosperity. This includes agreeing to the
Australia-United Arab Emirates Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement, the
Australia-India Economic Cooperation and Trade Agreement, and the Australia-UK Free
Trade Agreement.

Austrade also promotes opportunities for exporters to take advantage of FTAs that we
share with our Southeast Asian trading partners as opportunities to enhance their
competitive market positioning, including with Indonesia (IA-CEPA), Singapore (SAFTA),
Malaysia (MAFTA), and Thailand (TAFTA), as well as other major regional agreements
including the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Area (AANZFTA), the Regional
Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) and the Comprehensive and Progressive
Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP).

The Government is implementing a range of measures to deepen Australia’s agriculture
and food-related trade with Southeast Asia as part of Invested: Australia’s Southeast
Asia Economic Strategy to 2040. As previously noted, Austrade administers SEABX —a
key recommendation of ‘Invested’. Under SEABX, 2 agri-food-focused business
missions to Indonesia and Brunei were conducted in November 2025. An additional
business mission is planned to Vietnam in March 2026.

Austrade will also be delivering strategic trade events in the region, like Food & Hotel
Asia in Singapore, in line with Invested’s recommendation for greater agricultural trade
and investment with Southeast Asia.

These trade functions are critical in supporting Australia’s agricultural, fisheries and
forestry exporting businesses in accessing overseas markets and ensuring the smooth
flow of trade in Australian food and fibre products. The functions also support sta bility
of Australia’s agricultural trade position in a more uncertain geopolitical and
international trading environment.

Recommendation 4

Recommendation 4: The committee recommends that the Australian Government
support the uptake of Al-driven and automation technologies to drive innovation and
productivity in the Australian food and beverage manufacturing industry.

Response: The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.

The Government is supporting the uptake of critical technologies, such as artificial
intelligence (Al) and autonomous systems, in the national interest to drive innovation
and productivity across the economy, including in the Australian food and beverage
manufacturing industry.

This approach is anchored in the National Al Plan, released in December 2025, which
sets out the Government’s ambition to position Australia as a leader in responsible,
inclusive and innovative Al development and adoption. The Plan establishes a national
framework for action, guiding government, industry, research and the community to
work together to capture the full benefits of Al.

The National Reconstruction Fund is investing in enabling capabilities, including Al and
autonomous systems, as a priority area of the economy. The Government has set clear
expectations through its Investment Mandate that the National Reconstruction Fund
Corporation (NRFC) targets funding levels over the medium to long term of up to

$1 billion for critical technologies in the national interest. This sits alongside a target
funding level of $500 million for value-adding in agriculture, forestry, fisheries, food and
fibre which may include food and beverage manufacturing.

CSIRO serves as a Catalyst behind transformative food innovation in Australia. Through
its Food Innovation Centre in Werribee and food pilot plantin Brisbane, CSIRO gives
industry direct access to world-class research, facilities, and cutting-edge
technologies, including Al and advanced automation, helping businesses streamline
manufacturing, assure quality, and optimise supply chains.

The Government is supporting Al and automation adoption more broadly through:

e the establishment of an Al Safety Institute, which will monitor, test and share
information on emerging Al capabilities, risks and harms, supporting regulators
and portfolio agencies to maintain safety measures and ensure Al systems are
used responsibly and transparently.

e the National Al Centre (NAIC), which provides leadership, resources, and support
to help Australian businesses and organisations adopt Al responsibly and drive
innovation.

e the four Al Adopt Centres, which provide training courses, one-on-one
consultations and roadmaps, technology demonstrations as wellas practical
tools and resources to support safe adoption of Al technologies for SMEs.

° a new Cooperative Research Centres Al Accelerator funding round, which will
incentivise partnerships between businesses and research organisations to help
Australian ideas scale and compete on the global stage.

e the National Robotics Strategy, which focuses on increasing adoption by
supporting businesses to integrate robotics and automation technologies into
their operations.

Recommendation 5

Recommendation 5: The committee recommends that the Australian Government, in
consultation with industry stakeholders, identify specific opportunities for value-adding
to food and beverage products which would increase the proportion of onshore
value-added products.

Response: The Australian Government agrees in-principle with this recommendation.

The Government continues to engage with industry to help shape policy and identify
investment opportunities that support value-adding to food and beverage products.

Value-add in agriculture, forestry and fisheries is one of the seven priority areas for
investment by the $15 billion National Reconstruction Fund. The NRFC is engaging with
industry on a strong pipeline of opportunities to invest in this area, while also
supporting regional development and creating local jobs.

The National Food Security Strategy is being developed through a co-design process led
by DAFF, involving industry, community and government stakeholders. It will provide a
coherent national policy that improves supply chain resilience, minimises price
volatility and improves food security. This strategy will be supported by a National Food
Council, comprised of industry and community experts from across the Australian food
system.

The Cooperative Research Centres (CRC) program funds industry-led collaborations
between industry, researchers and end users for commercialising research in
developing value-added products. The Government has committed $115 million to

3 CRC’s researching innovative food technologies, improving agricultural productivity
and reducing food waste: the Future Food Systems CRC, Food Agility CRC and End
Food Waste CRC. Additionally, food and beverage manufacturing related projects
supported under rounds 14-16 of the CRC Projects stream include advancement of
lower alcohol and calorie ‘Australian lifestyle wines’, delivering allergen-safe eggs and
novel R&D for vanilla propagation, production and product.

CSIRO research bridges scientific excellence and practical application to support the
growth of Australia’s food and beverage sector, including by developing and

10

commercialising new technologies and products that upgrade lower-value inputs,
improve nutritional profiles, and extend product shelf-life. CSIRO empowers
businesses of all sizes to commercialise their research and bring these new products to
market, leveraging state-of-the-art pilot plants in Victoria and Queensland. For
example, at the Food Innovation Centre in Victoria, CSIRO’s expertise in high pressure
processing (HPP) enabled Preshafood, to launch premium fruit juices that retain
exceptional quality and nutrition while achieving longer shelf life. This innovation has
not only boosted Preshafood’s growth — making it Australia’s largest HPP operation —
but also created jobs, expanded export opportunities and enhanced safety in
perishable foods.

Recommendation 6

Recommendation 6: The committee recommends that the Australian Government, in
consultation with industry stakeholders, identify opportunities to provide targeted
support for the growing novel food and beverage industry.

Response: The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.

The Government recognises the important role novel foods play in the broader food
ecosystem by offering options that meet consumer values and expectations for
sustainability, improved nutrition and to address growing global food demands.

In June 2025, Australia became one of the first jurisdictions, following the US and
Singapore, to approve cell-cultured food for sale and consumption. As part of the
approval process, Food Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) developed a new
risk-based regulatory framework that provides clear and predictable rules for
businesses, including labelling requirements.

FSANZ is investigating opportunities to shorten assessment and approval pathways for
novel foods. For example, by incorporating safety assessments already undertaken by
other international agencies, as is currently done for genetically modified foods. This
could provide a competitive edge for Australian businesses seeking to invest in the
novel food sector.

FSANZ is also supporting the commercialisation of Indigenous foods. While a business
may proceed to market without consulting FSANZ, they may choose to seek a view from
FSANZ’s Advisory Committee on Novel Foods (ACNF) to confirm the food is not novel
and therefore does not require pre-market approval from FSANZ before it may be sold.
The ACNF will determine whether a native or Indigenous food is considered a traditional
food based on its history of use in Australia or New Zealand. If used in a non-traditional
way, it may be considered a novel food requiring pre-market approval by FSANZ.
Indigenous food businesses wishing to commercialise their traditional foods
sometimes have difficulty providing written evidence of a significant history of use when
making an enquiry to the ACMF. To assist these businesses, the ACNF will accept elder
statements in lieu of detailed scientific or published information regarding history of
use.

Agricultural traceability mechanisms have the potential to give communities the tools
to protect their novel food and beverage products and culture. Cultural provenance and

11

intellectual property are identified critical issues for First Nations Australians’
agricultural producers and communities —for example, under the National Agricultural
Traceability Strategy 2023 to 2033. The Government has partnered with several

First Nations organisations and provided $2 million in grant funding to increase capacity
to track and trace products. These projects will support verifying provenance,
value-added benefits, training programs, product and branding development, and build
understanding of international markets’ access requirements.

Since 2018, Australian Governments have committed over $127 million towards
continuous improvement of Australia’s agricultural traceability capability.

The Government is further supporting novel food development through funding
mechanisms such as a $17.14 million Local Industry Grant to support the
establishment of a pilot food manufacturing innovation hub on the Central Coast of
New South Wales. Construction of the hub commenced in April 2025. The hub will
supplement the existing hub/cluster ecosystem, contributing to the food and beverage
sector remaining competitive, productive and embracing new technology to develop
novel foods.

The facility is designed to support both established and scale-up food and beverage
businesses, including pilot and training spaces dedicated to product development,
skills training and innovation. Expected to be operational by early 2026, work is already
underway to have programs developed, piloted and proven in the lead-up to its
opening.

Recommendation 7

Recommendation 7: The committee recommends that the Australian Government
review Australia’s current environmental protection laws to ensure that Australia’s
native flora are protected from being propagated overseas for commercial use.

Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.

Australia’s Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act)
has some of the strongest protections in the world for the export of native flora. All
exports of native flora species are currently regulated under the EPBC Act, unless
specifically exempt under the List of Exempt Native Specimens (LENS). '

The Government remains committed to strengthening and streamlining our national
environmental laws, including establishing a federal environment protection agency.
The Government recently reformed the EPBC Act. These reforms are based on 3 pillars:
stronger environmental protection and restoration, more efficient and robust project
assessments and greater accountability and transparency in decision making.

1The LENS is a legislative instrument that lists a small number of plant specimens where export is
considered low risk to the survival of wild populations. Any whole, part or derivative of a plant specimen
that is not listed on the LENS requires export approval. Any exports contrary to this are prohibited, and
severe penalties may apply. If evidence suggests that specimens have been illegally exported, Australia
may seek mutual compliance assistance from the overseas country.

12

Australia’s strict regulation and requirements for sustainable harvest prior to export
prevents our native flora from being threatened by trade. To be granted export approval,
plant specimens must originate from an approved source under the EPBC Act. The
assessment considers whether stock is lawfully obtained and that harvest is
sustainable. The objectives of the Convention on Biological Diversity are also taken into
consideration where appropriate. Where harvest from the wild is proposed, the public
is provided the opportunity to comment prior to a decision. If necessary, conditions will
be placed on an approval.

Work is ongoing through a pilot project established by the Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade (DFAT) and the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) to provide
greater understanding of and access to IP protection for First Nations businesses. This
pilot aims to increase First Nations communities’ participation in, and benefits derived
from, international trade. Topics explored will include how IP can be leveraged to assist
in protecting native flora from commercial propagation overseas.

Recommendation 8

Recommendation 8: The committee recommends that the Australian Government
provide support and funding to activate the North Melbourne food innovation precinct.

Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.

The Government acknowledges the linkages and benefits that come from place-based
initiatives such as innovation hubs and precincts. The Government’s existing Support of
innovation hubs and precincts includes:

e $17.14 million through a Local Industry Grant for the development of a food
innovation hub in partnership with Central Coast Industry Connect on the central
coast of New South Wales, as detailed in Recommendation 6.

e $3 million through the Food and Agribusiness Growth Centre’s Cluster Program,
which has funded 8 food and agribusiness clusters across Australia including the
Central Coast Food Alliance, FermenTasmania, Food & Agribusiness Network, Food
& Fibre Gippsland, Tasmania Agrifood Network, Tropical North Queensland
Regional Food Network, Greater Whitsunday Alliance, Limestone Coast Food and
Agribusiness Cluster.

e $50 million through the Trailblazer Program to establish the Food and Beverage
Accelerator (FaBA), a hub based at the University of Queensland. FaBA offers
4 programs assisting businesses with ingredient innovation and new product
commercialisation; provides access to new technology such as precision
fermentation; offers skills training centre for food science, biotechnology and
engineering, and a premium food and beverage program including a pilot scale plant
and processing equipment.

CSIRO’s Food Innovation Centre in Werribee, Victoria and the joint Queensland
Government/CSIRO food pilot plant in Brisbane, provide a broad range of expertise,
research, technology and support services to the food, ingredient and equipment
manufacturing sectors.

13

Strengthening Australia’s R&D system is important for securing Australia’s future
prosperity and a Future Made in Australia. Through the 2024-25 Budget, the
Government commissioned an independent expert panel to conduct a strategic
examination of Australia’s R&D system, including opportunities to support the
achievement of national priorities, mechanisms to improve coordination and impact of
R&D funding and programs, and drive greater R&D investment and adoption of
innovation by industry. The Government will consider actions related to innovation
hubs and precincts in line with recommendations of the Strategic Examination of
Research and Development (SERD). The Governmentis currently considering the SERD
panel’s final report which was delivered in December 2025.

Recommendation 9

Recommendation 9: The committee recommends that the Australian Government, in
consultation with industry stakeholders, identify areas of skills shortages and support
solutions that will help provide immediate relief, while investing in the longer term
development of the workforce.

Response: The Australian Government agrees with this recommendation.

The Government’s collaborative tripartite approach to the vocational education and
training (VET) sector brings together employers, unions and governments to find
solutions to skills and workforce challenges. Ten not-for-profit, industry-led Jobs and
Skills Councils (JSCs) have been established so industry can help to ensure the VET
sector delivers better outcomes for learners and employers, including the identification
of skills and workforce needs.

Food and beverage manufacturing falls under the remit of the Manufacturing Industry
Skills Alliance JSC. Skills Insight is the JSC for the agribusiness, fibre, furnishing, food,
animal and environment care sectors. Each JSC works closely with Jobs and Skills
Australia SA), drawing on JSA’s workforce analysis and projections to plan for their
industry sectors, including the annual Occupation Shortage List. In January 2025, JSA
published a capacity study on the food supply chain workforce, which includes new
data and advice on workforce planning in the food manufacturing industry.

To address skills and workforce shortages in the agricultural sector, DAFF works closely
with industry stakeholders and government agencies that influence skills and training,
overseas workforce and migration pathways. DAFF supports the Agricultural Workforce
Forum which brings together employers, unions, and government to collaborate on
potential workforce solutions in agriculture and meat processing and manages
initiatives, such as the AgConnections Program, which help the sector attract the
diverse university skills it needs for the future.

The National Indigenous Australians Agency chairs the Remote Food Security Working
Group. The working group is an industry coordination mechanism which identifies and
addresses barriers in the remote supply chain. Membership includes Commonwealth,
state and territory governments, remote retailers, major wholesalers, distributors, and
Aboriginal community-controlled health organisations.

Other initiatives to help address skills’ needs include:

14

e The Department of Home Affairs issues a range of visa products including state and
territory nominations, labour agreements including Designated Area Migration
Agreements, and employer-sponsored visas. For example, the Pacific Australia
Labour Mobility (PALM) scheme helps to fill labour gaps in rural and regional
Australia and nationally for agriculture and select agriculture-related food product
manufacturing sectors. Labour agreements are also in place for the meat industry
and the horticulture industry. The Horticulture Industry Labour Agreement (HILA)
has a total of 31 approved occupations available through the agreement, including
occupations relevant to the food and beverage manufacturing sector.

e Arange of programs administered by the Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations, such as Workforce Australia and the Local Jobs Program, that
support businesses with their immediate and future recruitment needs. This may
include arranging pre-employment or skills training for candidates before they start
a job.

e The National Skills Agreement expands Governments’ investment in VET and
supports actions that prioritise critical skills areas including food security, ensuring
the VET system is robust and responsive to current and future skills and workforce
needs.

e Over $1.5 billion funding is being delivered in partnership with state and territory
governments for more than 500,000 Fee-Free TAFE and VET places across Australia
from 2023 to 2026. Fee-Free TAFE covers a range of high priority courses, including
in agriculture and manufacturing. Current offerings include qualifications in
specialised livestock production, digitalagronomy, agribusiness management and
food processing. Free TAFE will also be a permanent feature of the national VET
system, underpinned by the Free TAFE Act 2025, and will support at least 100,000
Free TAFE and VET places per year from 2027.

Recommendation 10

Recommendation 10: The committee recommends that the Australian Government
investigate ways to update educational pedagogy and practice in food science and
nutrition classes across primary school, high school, tertiary and TAFE education, to
align with the rapid technological advancements occurring in the industry.

This should be done in collaboration with state/territory governments, with a view to
increase hands-on and on-site experiences to attract and nurture talent for the future of
Australia’s food and beverage manufacturing industry.

Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.

The Australian Curriculum provides multiple opportunities for students in Foundation
to Year 10 to learn about food and nutrition. The latest version of the curriculum
(version 9.0) was approved by all Education ministers on 1 April 2022. The review
included consultation with state and territory governments, school education and
related subject matter experts, mapping against selected international curricula, as
well as public consultation. Opportunities to teach and learn about food and nutrition
are highlighted through 2 curriculum connections, Food and Fibre and Food and

15

Wellbeing. State and territory government and non-government education authorities
are responsible for implementing the curriculum in schools. This includes determining
the timing and approach for implementation of the revised curriculum, programs used,
and decisions about pedagogy and practice.

Building skills for the future, CSIRO has actively supported teacher and student
education in food and nutrition, delivering leading programs such as Taste & Learn™ and
VegkIT to increase healthy eating and boost STEM expertise across communities.

As autonomous self-accrediting institutions, universities determine their own course
content and structure. The Government does not directly intervene to influence what is
taught or pedagogical approaches. However, universities have consulted with industry
across both research and in the development of courses to enhance content and
student outcomes. This is particularly true across industries in which students require
professional accreditation following graduation to practice such as medicine, nursing,
teaching and allied health fields.

The food and beverage manufacturing sector, working with the Manufacturing Industry
Skills Alliance, ensures that vocational education and training remains fit-for-purpose
and reflects modern industry, including by incorporating the latest approaches and
technological advancements.

Recommendation 11

Recommendation 11: The committee recommends that the Australian Government, in
collaboration with industry stakeholders, identify and map out Key logistic
infrastructure bottlenecks. This process should include a close analysis of the
Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme (TFES), with a view to lowering the freight rates.

Response: The Australian Government agrees in-principle to this recommendation.

CSIRO’s TraNSIT Model is being used both nationally and internationally to improve
supply chain efficiency and help identify options for transport and logistics investment.
TraNSIT models 185 commodities, representing more than 25 million truck trips and
200,000 rail trips per annum. In addition, the National Freight and Supply Chain
Strategy (Strategy) sets the agenda for a collaborative approach to deliver actions by
governments and industry across all freight modes. The Strategy identifies resilience as
a National Priority Action Area alongside productivity, decarbonisation and data. The
Strategy includes an action to define and model the current freight and supply chain
network. Part of this action will be to consider network capacity, bottlenecks and modal
share along key routes. This action is slated for delivery in 2026.

The Government has committed to a review of the Tasmanian Freight Equalisation
Scheme in 2025-26. The review will consider if the scheme could better support
Tasmanian businesses to compete in other markets, recognising that, unlike their
mainland counterparts, Tasmanian shippers do not have the option of transporting
goods interstate by road or rail. The review will also consider the role of the Bass Strait
Passenger Vehicle Equalisation Scheme in reducing the cost of passenger vehicles
being moved across Bass Strait.

16

Recommendation 12

Recommendation 12: The committee recommends that the Australian Government
provide support and funding to establish strategically positioned food and beverage
manufacturing facilities to enable increased regional food resilience, including:

e a manufacturing facility in northern Australia, to reduce the ecological footprint of
food transport and increase regional employment, and

e a food innovation hub in northern Australia that is designed to support Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander businesses.

Response: The Australian Government agrees in-principle to the aspects relating to
the development of place-based facilities, and notes aspects relating to a
manufacturing facility in northern Australia designed to support Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander businesses.

The Government’s consideration of manufacturing precincts is detailed in
Recommendation 8. Industry-led proposals for food and beverage manufacturing
facilities, investment and other support can also be considered through programs such
as the National Reconstruction Fund and Industry Growth Program.

The Government is committed to increasing food manufacturing, security, innovation
and resilience, including in Northern Australia and for First Nations businesses and
regional communities. The Government funds several service providers, such as
Indigenous Business Australia (IBA) to deliver business support services and improve
access to capital to First Nations businesses and entrepreneurs. IBA provides support
at all stages of business development, with a focus on early start-up businesses. The
Indigenous Business and Employment Hubs program has hub offices located in
Western Sydney, Perth, Adelaide, Darwin and Alice Springs. The hubs support

First Nations businesses based in predominantly metropolitan and regional areas by
providing business capability development services and referral to mainstream and
First Nations-specific supports. The Business Solutions Program delivers business
finance products, business support services and business skills workshops to

First Nations entrepreneurs in urban, regional and remote Australia. Many Rivers
Microfinance Limited delivers microbusiness support and community economic
development support through their Microenterprise Development and Community
Economic Development programs.

17

Recommendation 13

Recommendation 13: The committee recommends that the Australian Government, in
consultation with industry stakeholders, implement a program of certification for the
domestic organic food market, and amend the Australian Competition & Consumer
Commission’s definition of the term ‘organic’ to mean ‘certified organic’.

Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.

The Government acknowledges the ongoing advocacy of parts of the organics industry
for domestic regulation, including a legislated definition of the term ‘organic’. Any
approach to the domestic regulation of the organics industry would require
consideration of policy and regulatory issues including costs, interactions with state
and territory laws and international agreements.

While parts of the organics industry continue to advocate for a legislated definition, the
term “organic” is not defined by either the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission (ACCC) or under Australian Consumer Law (ACL).

There are a range of protections already in place to ensure that businesses making an
‘organic’ claim can prove that claim. The ACL prohibits businesses from engaging in
misleading or deceptive conduct, and from making false or misleading representations.
It is enforced by state and territory ACL regulators, as well as the ACCC.

To protect Australian consumers from false and misleading conduct, all foods
produced or imported for sale in Australia and New Zealand, including organic food,
must meet all relevant requirements under the Australia New Zealand Food Standards
Code developed and maintained by FSANZ.

Recommendation 14

Recommendation 14: The committee recommends that the Australian Government
coordinate with state/territory and local governments on changeover dates and
timelines when introducing new labelling requirements.

Response: The Australian Government agrees in-principle to this recommendation.

The Australian Government develops food labelling standards in consultation with the
states and territories, which are adopted simultaneously across all Australian
jurisdictions. The Commonwealth coordinates on food regulation system matters
through the Food Ministers’ Meeting, the Food Regulation Standing Committee and the
Implementation Subcommittee for Food Regulation. These forums engage state and
territory jurisdictions, the New Zealand Government and local councils.

During the standards development process, the Government seeks to minimise costs
and disruption associated with the introduction of new labelling requirements through
consideration of appropriate transition periods and stock-in-trade provisions, allowing
food businesses to incorporate regulatory changes into routine label updates where
possible. These implementation measures are considered alongside public health and
safety considerations, and through consultation with impacted food industry sectors.

18

One example is the introduction of plain English allergen labelling in 2021, which hada
3-year transition period followed by a 2-year stock-in-trade provision, balancing
consumer safety with the substantial challenges faced by industry during COVID-19.
Similarly, the introduction of mandatory pregnancy warning labels in 2020 had a 3-year
transition period and an unlimited stock-in-trade provision, recognising the cost and
practicality of re-labelling products that require aging/cellaring.

FSANZ, as the independent statutory authority responsible for developing and
maintaining the Australia New Zealand Food Standards Code, is currently exploring the
introduction of a common commencement date for future labelling changes introduced
by the food regulatory system. Consultation with key stakeholder groups is ongoing.

Recommendation 15

Recommendation 15: The committee recommends that the Australian Government
support digitisation and innovation opportunities for labelling, such as the
implementation of QR codes, to provide additional information to consumers.

Response: The Australian Government agrees in-principle to this recommendation.

Australia’s joint food regulation system allows food producers and businesses to
innovate in how they provide information to consumers.

The Government recognises that digital technologies, such as QR codes, verified
credentials and digital product passports, can provide consumers with expanded
information with the potential to drive competition, minimise food waste, and support
healthy and informed choices. Since 2018, the Australian Government has committed
over $127 million towards continuous improvement of agricultural traceability,
supporting producers and manufacturers to demonstrate provenance and expand
information available to consumers and exporters. FSANZ is currently exploring how
digital technologies on food labels can leverage this enhanced supply chain traceability
to expand consumer information.

The Government also recognises the importance of maintaining consumer access to
safety and nutrition information in digital environments. Labelling information thatis
mandatory on physical food labels is not always available to online shoppers at
point-of-sale. The Food Regulation Standing Committee and FSANZ are considering
how food labelling information requirements should apply to online shipping
environments to better support healthy and informed consumers. Maintaining
consumer access to core safety and nutrition information as well as compliance with
the Australian Consumer Law, remains essential.

19

Recommendation 16

Recommendation 16: The committee recommends the formation of a new House
Select Committee to inquire and report into all aspects of Australia’s alcohol industry.

Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.

The establishment of House Select Committees is a matter for the Parliament. House
Select Committees are appointed, as the need arises, by a resolution of the House.

Recommendation 17

Recommendation 17: The committee recommends the Australian Government work
with industry to establish a new body, ‘Spirits Australia’, similar to the existing statutory
body, Wine Australia. The new body should be developed in consultation with industry
stakeholders and be industry-funded.

Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.

This issue could be considered as part of any broader inquiry into all aspects of the
alcohol sector, as recommended by the Committee in Recommendation 16.

Recommendation 18

Recommendation 18: The committee recommends that the Australian Government
continue to fund End Food Waste Australia. Further collaboration opportunities should
be sought to accelerate progress to meet the National Food Waste Strategy target to
halve food waste by 2030.

Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.

In 2018, the Government awarded Fight Food Waste Limited (FFWL) a $30 million grant
to be used over a ten-year funding term, ending in 2028. The grant supported FFWL to
establish the Fight Food Waste CRC. The objectives of the CRC are to:

e reduce food waste throughout the supply chain
e transform unavoidable waste into innovative high-value co-products
e engage with industry and consumers to deliver behavioural change

The Government provided the grant under the CRC Program.” CRCs are entities
established independent of Government, to support activities in the grant agreement.
The CRC Program guidelines do not allow for funding beyond the initial grant amount
and term; and require all CRCs to undertake transition planning. This assists CRCs to
prepare for the period after their grant funding ends. It also helps them to maximise
their outcomes and impacts into the future.

2 Administered by DISR.

20

From 2020-24, the Government provided FFWL a $4 million one-off, ad hoc grant to
Stop Food Waste Australia (SFWA).? SFWA was a governance entity helping to deliver
the National Food Waste Strategy. The grant also supported SFWA to deliver food waste
avoidance initiatives across the food supply chain including the Australian Food Pact
(Pact) and sector-specific action plans (SAPs). The grant agreement expected SFWA to
transition to a self-funded model by the end of the grant period, with Pact membership
fees and partnership contributions generating ongoing revenue.

In 2023, the Government awarded FFWL a $10 million one-off, ad hoc grant* supporting
them to develop and launch ‘The Great Unwaste’. This campaign is helping to reduce
food waste from Australian households.

FFWL changed their named to End Food Waste Australia Limited in November 2023.
The change unified the Fight Food Waste CRC and SFWA under one brand, End Food
Waste Australia (EFWA). EFWA’s organisational structure includes the following work
programs partially funded by the Australian Government:

e End Food Waste CRC (the former Fight Food Waste CRC)
e Industry Action (incorporating the Pact and SAPs)

e Nationwide Consumer Behaviour Change Campaign (delivering ‘The Great Unwaste’
campaign)

Recommendation 19

Recommendation 19: The committee recommends that the Australian Government
consider how it can incentivise, support, and coordinate food and beverage
manufacturers to engage in upcycling, recycling, and other circular economy solutions
to food waste.

Response: The Australian Government agrees in principle to this recommendation.

The Government’s 2024 National Circular Economy Framework is driving circular
economy transition efforts. Since February 2023, the Circular Economy Ministerial
Advisory Group has provided advice to the government on opportunities and challenges
associated with Australia’s transition to a more materials efficient circular economy,
including manufacturing in the food system. All levels of government, industry and the
not-for-profit sector are taking actions to reduce packaging and food waste under
Australia’s National Waste Policy Action Plan, which sets a sustainable path for the
management of Australia’s waste and resource recovery efforts.

EFWA’s work on the Pact and SAPs also support businesses to reduce food waste. The
Pact is bringing together food businesses across the supply chain to voluntarily commit
to reducing their food waste. SAPs identify solutions to tackle food waste in hotspot
sectors. SAPs have been developed for several sectors including bread and bakery,
dairy and the food cold chain.

3 National Food Waste Governance Entity grant administered by the former Department of Agriculture, Water and Environment from
December 2020 to June 2022, and by DCCEEW from July 2022 to June 2024.

4 Food Waste Nationwide Consumer Behavior Change Campaign grant administered by DCCEEW.

21

CSIRO is also driving Australia’s transition towards a circular economy. CSIRO partners
with manufacturers to turn food and agricultural waste into high-value products such
as animaland aquaculture feed, shelf-stable ingredients and nutritious snacks through
collaborative R&D and its involvement in the Circular Economy Research Network

Asia Pacific (CERN-APAC).

Depending on the nature of the proposal, food waste related projects may also be
eligible to apply for funding as part of the National Reconstruction Fund, Industry
Growth Program and other government programs.

Recommendation 20

Recommendation 20: The committee recommends that the Australian Government
investigate:
e sectoral needs for advanced manufacturing hubs and machinery,

e along with their location requirements, and

e use that information to create an Upcycled Food Infrastructure Investment Plan.
Response: The Australian Government agrees in-principle to the elements relating to
the development of manufacturing hubs and precincts as detailed in Recommendation

8 and notes the elements relating to the creation of an Upcycled Food Infrastructure
Investment Plan.

The Government’s consideration of manufacturing precincts is detailed in
Recommendation 8. The Government’s support for reducing food waste and upcycling
opportunities is detailed in the responses to Recommendations 18 and 19.

Recommendation 21

Recommendation 21: The committee recommends that the Australian Government

continue to develop policies to support reduced and recyclable food packaging,

including the consideration of:

e support for Australian businesses in the transition towards more sustainable
practices,

e national-level leadership in addressing packaging waste,
e incentivisation of material collection,

e packaging design standards that encourage circular economy principles.

Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.

The Government is working with all jurisdictions to consider options to reform the
regulation of packaging. This may include consideration of mandatory packaging design
requirements, minimum recycled content requirements, and removing harmful
chemicals from use in packaging.

To help bolster circularity across the economy, CSIRO’s research is supporting
Australian businesses to transition to sustainable practices. CSIRO’s Ending Plastic

22

Waste initiative provides technical expertise in packaging for different uses and design
requirements to meet circularity. CSIRO is working with industry through place-based
approaches to close the loop on packaging, such as the Bega Circular Valley Plastics
work stream which includes Pact Group, a company specialising in circular economy
solutions for packaging, reuse, recycling and contract manufacturing. In addition, the
Government is providing $8.5 million towards a National Circular Economy Centre in
Bega, to showcase the circular economy transition of the Bega Valley, and actas a
beacon for circularity efforts across the country.

Recommendation 22

Recommendation 22: The committee recommends that the Australian Government
work with state, territory and local governments and industry to harmonise Australia’s
container deposit schemes.

Response: The Australian Government agrees in-principle to this recommendation.

Every state and territory now operates a container deposit scheme. State and territory
governments are already working together to harmonise their schemes through the
Environment Ministers’ Meeting. The Government supports the harmonisation of
container deposit schemes, including simplifying the application system for
businesses, improving public uptake of the program, and ensuring the schemes are as
aligned as possible to drive recovery and recycling rates.

Recommendation 23

Recommendation 23: The committee recommends that the Australian Government
ensure that its Net Zero Plan provides support and incentives for Australian food and
beverage manufacturers to decarbonise.

Response: The Australian Government agrees in-principle this recommendation.

The Government’s Net Zero Plan guides Australia’s transition to the legislated target of
net zero by 2050. The plan sets out government priorities, policies and measures to
reduce emissions, and support investment in low emissions and renewable activities.
The Net Zero Plan is underpinned by 6 sectoral decarbonisation plans that cover all
major sources of emissions across the economy, including the Industry Sector Plan,
which guides the decarbonisation trajectory for Australia’s food and beverage
manufacturers.

The Australian Government is providing funding that supports the decarbonisation of
the food and beverage industry. For example, ARENA has provided $7.38 million for
McCain to reduce their gas consumption through innovative electrification
technologies through the Powering the Regions Fund Industrial Transformation Stream,
and $3.68 million for EnelX for a commercial refrigeration flexible demand project
through ARENA’s Advancing Renewables Program, among other projects. In addition,
DCCEEW’s Powering the Regions Fund Safeguard Transformation Stream has provided
up to $44.46 million to Shoalhaven Starches to upgrade their energy efficiency.

23

Australia’s Circular Economy Framework also recognises the significant opportunity
the food and agriculture sector presents in achieving net zero targets. As a
material-heavy sector, incorporating circular economy activities in food and agriculture
can result in reduced carbon emissions associated with operations.

24

This page intentionally left blank

This page intentionally left blank
