Australian Government response to the
Senate References Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence
and Trade interim and final reports:
Australia’s engagement in Afghanistan
May 2026
Page 1 of 6
Recommendations made in the report
Australia’s engagement in Afghanistan
Committee Recommendations
Final (Recommendation 1-6) and Interim (Recommendation 1-8) committee report
recommendations listed below response.
Response:
The Government notes the recommendations of the committee reports. However, given the
passage of time since the reports were tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer
appropriate.
Australia values its longstanding connection to the people of Afghanistan and the
contributions of the growing Australia Afghanistan community. We recognise this is a
challenging time for many in the community given the deeply concerning situation in
Afghanistan.
The Government stands with the people of Afghanistan. Australia does not regard the Taliban
as the legitimate representatives of the Afghan people and strongly condemns the Taliban’s
pervasive disregard for the human rights of the people of Afghanistan – particularly women
and girls, and voices of dissent.
The Government remains actively engaged on Afghanistan issues and focused on addressing
the dire humanitarian and human rights situation in Afghanistan.
The people of Afghanistan continue to suffer one of the world’s worst humanitarian crises,
with the United Nations estimating almost 22 million Afghan people are in need of
humanitarian support in 2026.
Since 2021, Australia has committed over $310 million the humanitarian and basic needs
assistance to the people of Afghanistan, with a strong focus on women and girls.
Australia supports UN partners to deliver priority assistance, including food security and
nutrition, water, sanitation and hygiene, shelter, health and protection. We have also provided
funding to support disaster response, including to earthquakes in Afghanistan in 20221, 2023,
and 2025.
Australia works with established partners, such as UN agencies, to ensure our support helps
those in need, not the Taliban.
The Government is taking strong and coordinated action to hold the Taliban to account for its
treatment of the Afghan people, particularly the sustained and systematic erasure of women
from public life.
Page 2 of 6
In December 2025, the Government established a world first autonomous sanctions
framework for Afghanistan. The new framework enables Australia to directly impose its own
sanctions and travel bans to increase pressure on the Taliban, targeting the oppression of the
Afghan people, particularly women and girls, as well as actions that undermine the rule of
law and good governance in Afghanistan.
On establishing the autonomous sanctions framework for Afghanistan, the Government listed
four senior Taliban members for their involvement in the oppression of women and girls and
in undermining good governance or the rule of law. This builds on the 140 individuals and
entities Australia currently sanctions under the United Nations Security Council’s Taliban
framework.
In September 2024, Australia commenced legal action, together with Canada, Germany and
the Netherlands, to hold Afghanistan to account for violations of the human rights of women
and girls as enshrined in the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women (CEDAW).
Australia consistently raises concerns regarding the situation in Afghanistan in national
statements delivered at the United Nations Human Rights Council and the United Nations
General Assembly.
Final report
Recommendation 1
7.29 The committee recognises the tragic situation facing the people of Afghanistan and as
the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan continues to worsen, the committee recommends
that the Australian Government continue to provide ongoing targeted multi-year funding,
including through the United Nation’s Humanitarian Response Plan for Afghanistan, which
may need to increase in response to the scale of increased need.
Recommendation 2
7.30 Given the severity of the crises facing the people of Afghanistan, the committee
recommends that the Australian Government utilise the most effective channels for aid
funding and distribution, which may include United Nations, World Food Programme and
non-government organisation (NGO) channels.
Recommendation 3
7.37 The committee recommends that the Australian Government continue to liaise with its
key allies and United Nations contacts and work together to develop solutions to the ongoing
liquidity crisis. Mechanisms should be multi-faceted and flexible and must provide
confidence for donors and the financial sector. However, importantly, any approach taken
must also emphasise the clear international expectation that the Taliban do not interfere with
the provision of aid to the people of Afghanistan.
Page 3 of 6
Recommendation 4
7.67 The committee recommends that the Department of Home Affairs urgently improve its
processes and communication in relation to Afghan visa applicants, including by:
 urgently sending acknowledgments to all visa applicants from Afghanistan to assist with
ongoing processing and communication;
 publishing more detailed criteria and guidance about how humanitarian visas for the
Afghan cohort will be prioritised, as well as expected average timeframes for visa
applications to be assessed;
 ensuring applicants on subclass 449 visas are given sufficient time and resources to lodge
their permanent visa applications; and
 issuing additional subclass 449 visas as necessary to overseas split family members of
evacuees in Australia, to ensure family unity is preserved in permanent visa applications.
Recommendation 5
7.78 The committee recommends that the Australian Government conduct a review of the
Humanitarian Settlement Program’s (HSP) structure and funding arrangements to provide
greater operational stability for HSP providers and greater flexibility in the way services can
be delivered during a crisis or emergency.
Recommendation 6
7.82 The committee recommends that the Australian Government enhances comprehensive
settlement planning for the ongoing intake of Afghan refugees, in conjunction with the
settlement services sector, relevant community groups, and state, territory and local
governments.
Interim Report
Recommendation 1
9.13 The committee recommends that an assessment of Australia’s whole-of-government
mission in Afghanistan be commissioned and conducted by an appropriate entity, which
follows an initial report on the 2001–2014 period which was released in November 2016.
Recommendation 2
9.24 The committee recommends that the Australian Government publish, where there are no
national security implications, a breakdown of the total cost of Australia’s engagement in
Afghanistan across each year of its engagement, as well as a breakdown of costs across
departments. These figures should also include the costs incurred and estimated ongoing
costs associated with services provided by the Department of Veterans’ Affairs supporting
veterans who served in Afghanistan.
Page 4 of 6
Recommendation 3
9.56 The committee recommends that the Australian Government commission an
independent review into the operation of the Afghanistan evacuation effort to ensure that
departmental practices and coordination are improved in future. This review should include
consideration of:
 the operation of the Australian Government Plan for the Reception of Australian Citizens
and Approved Foreign Nationals Evacuated from Overseas (AUSRECEPLAN) and other
relevant crisis management tools during the Afghanistan crisis, and whether amendments to
these frameworks are required;
 protocols for the issuance of short-term humanitarian visas during crisis situations;
 the need for increased surge capacity staffing in relevant departments to assist in
communications and visa processing during crisis situations; and
 the development of formalised protocols for incorporating relevant stakeholder groups into
government planning and evacuation processes (for example, legal and advocacy groups
working with affected groups and individuals in country).
Recommendation 4
9.63 The committee recommends that the Australian Government develop and implement
more accurate measures and methodologies for assessing and keeping track of the number of
Australian citizens, permanent residents, visa holders and visa applicants at risk during crisis
situations overseas.
Recommendation 5
9.89 The committee recommends that the Australian Government extend all available effort
to finalising certifications and visa applications for Afghan Locally Engaged Employees
(LEE) and their families as quickly as possible, and extending assistance to those still eligible
in Afghanistan to make their way to Australia.
9.90 The committee further recommends that the Australian Government commission a full
and thorough review of the operation of the Afghan LEE program to analyse and
appropriately address concerns raised in evidence to the committee and ensure that programs
of this nature are improved.
Recommendation 6
9.102 The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with coalition
partners and international organisations to support the resettlement of Afghan nationals
globally, with Australia making a contribution of places within the humanitarian, family,
skilled and other permanent visa categories to help resettle those Afghan nationals displaced
by the crisis.
Recommendation 7
Page 5 of 6
9.106 The committee recommends that, in light of the changed security circumstances in
Afghanistan, the Australian Government review its policies for pathways to permanent
protection visas for Afghan asylum seekers and refugees currently in Australia, and prioritise
family reunification when processing humanitarian visa claims from Afghan nationals.
Recommendation 8
9.120 The committee recommends that the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and
other Australian agencies providing development assistance foster further engagement with
local NGOs and diaspora groups which can assist with the provision of aid to the local level
and most vulnerable.
Page 6 of 6
