OFFICIAL
Australian Government response to the
Community Affairs Legislation Committee reports:
National Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment (Getting
the NDIS Back on Track No. 1) Bill 2024
APRIL 2026
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Overview
The Australian Government welcomes the Community Affairs Legislation Committee (Committee)
reports into the National Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment (Getting the NDIS Back on Track
No.1) Bill 2024 (Bill).
The first Committee report delivered on 20 June 2024 made four recommendations and the
subsequent report delivered on 9 August 2024 noted those recommendations had been addressed
by Government amendments and recommended passage of the Bill.
The Australian Government is committed to working alongside the disability community to
implement reforms enabled by the Bill which commenced on 3 October 2024.
Committee Recommendations (report delivered on 20 June 2024)
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends the bill include amendments so that First Ministers are also
recognised as Ministers for the purposes of Category A rule-making.
Agreed.
Government amendments on sheet PA112 responded to this recommendation by amending section
9 of the National Disability Insurance Act 2013 (NDIS Act) to expand the definition of host jurisdiction
Minister to include First Ministers of states and territories and allow First Ministers (in addition to
Disability Ministers) to agree to NDIS rules.
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that a consultation statement be tabled accompanying the legislative
instrument that sets out consultations undertaken.
Agreed.
Government amendments on sheet PA112 responded to this recommendation and inserted a new
section 211 to the NDIS Act, to prescribe that certain information about consultation must be
included in explanatory statement to legislative instruments made under the NDIS Act.
The amendment clarifies and strengthens the existing requirement on the Minister under paragraph
15J(2)(d) of the Legislation Act 2003, to provide information about consultation undertaken on
legislative instruments made under the NDIS Act.
The amendment requires the Minister to provide explanatory statements adhering to the following
requirements for all legislative instruments made under the NDIS Act moving forward:
• describe the nature of the consultation
• describe in general terms the persons, bodies or organisations who were consulted
• contain a summary of the views expressed by those persons, bodies or organisations.
2
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the Australian Government further clarify the circumstances
under which the additional powers granted to the National Disability Insurance Agency Chief
Executive Officer will be used.
Agreed.
Government amendments on sheet PA112 responded to this recommendation and inserted new
subsections 30(6A), 30A(7A) and 36(3A) of the NDIS Act, providing guidance that the CEO must
consider the reasonableness for a person not to have complied with a request for information and
have regard to the following matters:
• the length of time the person has had to provide the information (for example, a delay of 6
months may be appropriate in certain circumstances whereas a delay of 12 or 18 months
may not be)
• any previous failures by the participant to comply with a request for information made
under this Act
• any previous failures by the other person to comply with a request for information made
under this Act in relation to the participant
• the length of time since the CEO was last provided with information relevant to the decision
whether or not to revoke the participant's status as a participant
• whether the failure to comply with the request was beyond the control of the participant or
other person because of a delay in the provision of information to the participant or other
person
• any matters prescribed by Category A NDIS rules
• any other matters the CEO considers relevant.
Recommendation 4
Subject to the above recommendations, the committee recommends that the bill be passed.
Agreed.
Committee Recommendations (report delivered on 9 August 2024)
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the bill be passed as soon as practicable.
Agreed.
The Bill was passed by both houses on 22 August 2024 and came into effect on 3 October 2024.
3
OFFICIAL
Dissenting Report - Australian Greens
Recommendation 1
Australian Greens Senators recommend that the Bill not be supported.
Noted.
Recommendation 2
Australian Greens Senators recommend that the government ensure foundational supports be
comprehensively defined and implemented in states and territories
Noted.
Since the passage of the Bill in October 2024, Governments have committed to jointly contribute
$4 billion over 5 years to implement the first phase of Foundational Supports, known as ‘Thriving
Kids’.
The National Agreement on Foundational Supports 2026-31 commenced on 2 February 2026 and is
available at National Agreement on Foundational Supports | Federal Financial Relations.
Recommendation 3
Australian Greens Senators recommend that the Government deliver a formal response to the
NDIS Review.
Once these actions have been undertaken, the Government can return to the question of
amending the NDIS Act but with a commitment to true, authentic co-design with disabled people
to achieve change that will meaningfully improve the lives of the many people who rely on the
NDIS.
Noted.
In December 2023 National Cabinet acknowledged the need for reforms to secure the future of the
NDIS, ensuring it can continue to provide life-changing support to future generations of Australians
with a disability.
Governments noted the release of the final report of the Independent NDIS Review, co-led by
Professor Bruce Bonyhady AM and Ms Lisa Paul AO PSM.
National Cabinet agreed to work together to implement legislative and other changes to the NDIS to
improve the experience of participants and restore the original intent of the Scheme to support
people with permanent and significant disability, within a broader ecosystem of supports.
The Australia Government remains committed to working alongside people with disability on NDIS
reforms.
4
