Australian Government response to the
Senate Environment and Communications Legislations
Committee report:
Water Amendment (Restoring Our Rivers) Bill 2023
[Provisions]
MAY 2026
1
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the opportunity to respond to the Environment and
Communications Legislation Committee (the Committee) report on the Water Amendment
(Restoring Our Rivers) Bill 2023, and thanks the Committee and those individuals and
organisations who contributed to the inquiry.
The Murray ̶ Darling Basin (the Basin) is Australia’s largest and most complex river system,
covering 1 million square kilometres of south-eastern Australia across Queensland, New
South Wales, Victoria, the Australian Capital Territory and Victoria. A healthy and
sustainable river system is critical for Basin communities, industries, the environment, and
First Nations.
Key elements of the Basin Plan were due to be completed by 30 June 2024. The Murray–
Darling Basin Authority (MDBA) advised that full plan implementation would not be possible
by this date. Building on the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission’s 2021
inquiry into water markets, it was also appropriate to make legislative changes needed to
drive water markets reform. Water markets in the Basin had outgrown the regulatory settings
leading to concerns about transparency, integrity, and accountability.
The Water Amendment (Restoring Our Rivers) Bill 2023 (the Bill) was introduced into
Parliament on 6 September 2023. The purpose of the Bill was to amend the Water Act 2007
(the Water Act) and the Basin Plan 2012 (Basin Plan) to:
• Support implementation of the Basin Plan in full, including recovering 450 gigalitres
(GL) of additional environmental water.
• Implement recommendations from the Water Market Reform: Final Roadmap to
restore transparency, integrity, and confidence in water markets in the Basin.
The Bill passed both houses of Parliament on 30 November 2023 and received Royal
Assent on 7 December 2023.
Many of the Committee recommendations informed amendments to the Bill in the Senate
and are now in effect under the Water Amendment (Restoring Our Rivers) Act 2023
(Restoring Our Rivers Act).
On 30 January 2024, the Australian Government released the Restoring Our Rivers: Draft
framework for delivering the 450 GL of additional environmental water for consultation.
Following the consultation process and release of a What We Heard report, an updated
framework was released in July 2024.
The Restoring Our Rivers: Framework for delivering the 450 GL of additional environmental
water outlines three principles that will guide the approach to water recovery:
1. Enhancing environmental outcomes.
2. Minimising socio-economic impacts.
3. Achieving value for money.
2
The framework also outlines the three programs that will be used to achieve the target:
1. Resilient Rivers Program, which launched on 30 January 2024, comprising
infrastructure projects and non-purchase water recovery options.
2. Voluntary Water Purchase Program, which opened on 15 July 2024, for purchase of
water entitlements from willing sellers.
3. Sustainable Communities Program, which launched on 11 June 2024, to provide
$300 million funding for communities impacted by water recovery.
The Restoring our Rivers Act also extended the deadline for delivering the Sustainable
Diversion Limit Adjustment Mechanism (SDLAM) projects to 31 December 2026 and enables
the Basin states to bring forward new projects. Three new supply projects were notified by
the Basin Officials Committee by the deadline of 30 June 2025, two in NSW and one in
Victoria.
In April 2024 the Australian Government commissioned an Independent Assessment of the
Murray–Darling Basin’s Supply and Constraints Measures to assess the feasibility of
delivering the existing supply and constraints measures by 31 December 2026. The
Assessment, released in June 2024, noted that project delivery has been delayed by lengthy
regulatory approval processes, flooding, Covid-19 and resource shortages. It also
recognised that significant progress had been made on planning activities and early works.
Basin governments are continuing to work together to maximise SDLAM contributions ahead
of legislated deadlines.
Further information on these programs is available on the Department of Climate Change,
Energy, Environment and Water (DCCEEW) website at:
www.dcceew.gov.au/water/policy/implementing-the-plan.
3
Committee Recommendations – Government Response
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that, as soon as practicable, the Australian Government, in
consultation with relevant state governments, release a detailed public implementation
schedule that outlines how supply and constraints projects will be operable by
31 December 2026.
Agreed.
In June 2024, the Australian Government published an Independent Assessment of the
SDLAM Supply and Constraints Measures. All Basin governments are continuing to work
together to implement the projects to maximise outcomes by the end of 2026.
As required by the Restoring Our Rivers Act, the MDBA, in consultation with Basin states,
developed a Constraints Relaxation Implementation Roadmap which was published on
18 December 2024.
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that unfeasible SDLAM projects should be either rescoped to
meet the proposed new deadline or discontinued immediately and that the Australian
Government be made responsible for withdrawing these projects where the relevant basin
state fails to do so within a reasonable timeframe.
Agreed.
The Restoring Our Rivers Act enables the Commonwealth to withdraw SDLAM projects that
will not be operational by 31 December 2026.
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the Australian Government, in consultation with relevant
state governments, consider and implement an appropriate mechanism before the
proposed 31 December 2026 deadline to prevent future delays or other non-compliance.
Agreed.
The Restoring Our Rivers Act requires the Minister to table an annual report on progress
towards water recovery targets, including the progress of SDLAM projects.
The Australian Government has been working with states to ensure Federation Funding
Agreements for SDLAM projects include milestones that better reflect measurable outcomes
and provide clearer reporting of project performance.
4
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that constraints removal projects be separated from supply
projects and pursued under a different program.
Noted.
The Australian Government, in consultation with other Basin governments, is considering the
future of the constraints program based on the Constraints Relaxation Implementation
Roadmap and the Basin Plan Review.
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends that the Australian Government provide public information on
how lessons from previous community assistance programs will inform the current
package, as well as information on what will trigger a community assistance package and
how these will be implemented.
Agreed.
In early 2024, the Australian Government undertook public consultation on the Draft
framework for delivering the 450 GL of additional environmental water. The framework was
published in July 2024 and included an approach to minimising socio-economic impacts of
voluntary water purchase and draft community adjustment support principles.
A What We Heard report was released in June 2024, outlining the feedback received
through this consultation, including lessons learned from previous community adjustment
programs and suggestions on the draft community adjustment principles. This informed the
development of the Sustainable Communities Program and the final principles that are
reflected in funding agreements signed with SA and NSW to deliver the program.
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends that the Australian Government implement appropriate
eligibility parameters for community assistance packages by requiring communities to
demonstrate how they were impacted by water acquisition, be proximate to the purchase
area, and for the assistance to be directed into projects that produce and maintain jobs for
the long-term.
Agreed in part.
There are seven principles that underpin the Sustainable Communities Program, including
that the program supports diversification and resilience, that there is proportional investment
that considers potential and observed impacts, and that the program is evidence based.
The Australian Government does not support a requirement that communities be solely
responsible for demonstrating how they were impacted by water recovery to be eligible for
assistance. This approach could unfairly exclude some communities with limited capacity to
undertake this type of analysis.
5
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends increasing accountability and transparency for all water
recovery through a public, real time tracking mechanism.
Agreed.
In September 2024 a new Basin Plan implementation dashboard was launched at:
www.dcceew.gov.au/water/policy/implementing-the-plan/dashboard. The dashboard is
updated quarterly.
Recommendation 8
The committee recommends that the Basin Plan be amended to require effective SDL
compliance from 1 July 2019, including allowing for the Register of Take to commence at
that date for all areas, to hold all jurisdictions to account for over-use in the absence of
accredited Water Resource Plans.
Agreed.
To ensure equity and fairness for all Basin states, the Restoring Our Rivers Act requires the
MDBA to make one-off adjustments to the register of take for surface water sustainable
diversion limit resource units for water resource plans (WRPs) which commenced after
1 July 2019.
Recommendation 9
The committee recommends that the Australian Government consider amending the
Water Act 2007 and the Basin Plan 2012 to expressly provide for First Nations’ values and
interests in the basin, having regard to the proposals received in this inquiry and the
principles of UNDRIP.
Agreed.
The Australian Government supports the participation and consideration of First Nations
Peoples and their traditional values and knowledge in decision-making processes that affect
them. This is the why the government supported several amendments to the Bill.
6
Recommendation 10
The committee recommends that the Minister for the Environment and Water consider
additional funding for the Aboriginal Water Entitlements Program to improve First Nations’
investment in cultural and economic water entitlements.
Agreed.
The Australian Government has:
• increased funding for the Aboriginal Water Entitlements Program (AWEP) from
$40 million to $100 million
• allocated $10.1 million to support transaction costs, and the interim holding and
administration arrangements associated with AWEP
• provided $20 million to First Nations Peoples across the Basin to undertake cultural
flows planning and further develop cultural economies.
Recommendation 11
The committee recommends the Water Act 2007 be amended to require the Murray–
Darling Basin Authority, in its review of the Basin Plan, to ensure that the management of
basin water resources takes into account spiritual, environmental, social, cultural and
economic matters relevant to Indigenous people.
Agreed.
The Restoring Our Rivers Act requires the MDBA, in undertaking the Basin Plan review, to
report on matters relevant to First Nations Peoples in relation to the management of Basin
water resources, including spiritual, environmental, cultural, social and economic matters.
Recommendation 12
The committee recommends that the Australian Government consider, as a matter of
priority, measures to hardwire First Nations representation in Basin Plan management and
decision-making.
Agreed.
In addition to the measures outlined in responses to Committee Recommendations 9, 10
and 11, the Restoring Our Rivers Act required that an additional First Nations member be
appointed to the MDBA board to contribute to decision-making and the management of
Basin water resources, including improved engagement activities. Ms Belinda Duarte was
appointed as the second Indigenous member of the MDBA board on 6 March 2025.
7
Recommendation 13
The committee recommends the Water Act 2007 be amended to strengthen the language
regarding the role of First Nations spiritual, cultural and economic perspectives in the
management of the basin water resources.
Agreed.
Refer to the responses to Committee Recommendations 9 and 11.
Recommendation 14
The committee recommends that, following the MDBA’s 2026 review, the Australian
Government embed the impacts of climate change in the Water Act and Basin Plan.
Noted.
The Restoring Our Rivers Act requires that the MDBA must consider the management of
climate change risks in the reporting on the Basin Plan review.
8
Coalition Senators’ Dissenting Report – Government Response
Recommendation 1
Support extending the deadlines for the implementation of the Basin Plan.
Agreed.
The Restoring Our Rivers Act extended deadlines for Basin Plan implementation.
Recommendation 2
Retain the existing Cap on Buybacks, noting there is still a significant volume available
before the Cap is reached.
Not agreed.
The Australian Government is committed to delivering the Basin Plan in full including the
additional 450 GL of environmental water. The Restoring Our Rivers Act made changes to
provide more options to deliver the target. While other water recovery tools are being
pursued, previous program outcomes and independent review processes established that
voluntary water purchase will be required.
Recommendation 3
Ensure all water recovered must meet the requirement to result in “neutral or positive
social and economic impacts” as per the 2012 Basin Plan.
Noted.
The Australian Government is working to minimise social and economic impacts from water
recovery.
The Australian Government will do this through:
• considering how the 450 GL of additional environmental water is recovered, with all
options being considered
• providing an additional three and half years to deliver the Basin Plan so that water
recovery can be steady and staged to provide communities more time to adjust
• working with Basin governments and communities to draw on local knowledge in co-
designing projects
• learning from outcomes of previous water recovery and community adjustment
programs
• in the case of water recovery towards the 450 GL, providing funding for community
adjustment assistance and working with Basin state governments in delivering this
assistance.
9
The Australian Government has committed $300 million to the Sustainable Communities
Program to provide community adjustment assistance to communities within the Murray–
Darling Basin.
The socio-economic test in the Basin Plan remains unchanged and will continue to apply to
water efficiency projects. The Restoring Our Rivers Act also introduced new requirements:
• Before approving a water purchase program for the 450 GL, the Minister must
consider the social and economic impacts on communities.
• The Secretary of DCCEEW must prepare an annual report on Basin Plan
implementation, that must include information about any program approved by the
Minister that was required to consider social and economic impacts.
• The third statutory review of the Water for the Environment Special Account must be
provided to the Minister by September 2025 and consider socio-economic impacts.
Recommendation 4
Broaden the definition for water recovery under the 450GL target to include rules-based
changes or other projects to enhance fish-passage or connectivity.
Agreed in part.
The Restoring Our Rivers Act provides the opportunity for rules-based approaches to
contribute to the 450 GL, provided these approaches deliver water rights that meet the
requirements for ‘additional held environmental water (HEW) entitlements’ under the Basin
Plan.
Complementary measures achieve important environmental outcomes, especially for native
fish, however they do not increase flows or deliver plan targets.
10
Australian Greens Additional Comments – Government Response
Recommendation 1
The Bill should not pass in its current form.
Noted.
Many of the Committee recommendations informed amendments to the Bill in the Senate
and are now in effect under the Restoring Our Rivers Act.
Recommendation 2
The Bill should be amended to guarantee that the Plan will be delivered in full and on time,
including the 450GL promised to South Australia for the environment.
Agreed in principle.
The Australian Government is committed to delivering the Basin Plan in full, including the
additional 450 GL of environmental water. The Restoring Our Rivers Act incorporates a
range of new accountability and transparency measures including:
• requiring that the Minister take all reasonable steps to increase the volume of the
Basin water resources by 450 GL by 31 December 2027
• requiring the Minister to table an annual report on progress made towards water
recovery targets each year
• a third statutory review of the WESA was completed in September 2025 to assess
the progress of water recovery to the 450 GL. Further information on the review is
available on the Department of Climate Change, Energy, Environment and Water
(DCCEEW) website at: https://www.dcceew.gov.au/water/policy/mdb/policy/wesa-
review
Recommendation 3
Failed SDLAM projects must be immediately scrapped and alternative measures
considered to recover water to meet the projected shortfall.
Noted.
Refer to the response to Committee Recommendations 1 and 2.
11
Recommendation 4
In addition to proposed amendments in the majority report, further consideration be given
to amendments that will ensure that First Nations participation, ownership and
management of water can be utilised in the delivery of environmental targets and
outcomes.
Agreed.
The Restoring Our Rivers Act requires the:
• MDBA to report on how environmental water holders considered First Nations values
and uses and involved First Nations Peoples in environmental water planning
• Minister to table an annual report on First Nations activities in the Basin that includes
activities and engagement on matters relevant for First Nations Peoples.
Refer to the response to Committee Recommendations 9, 10, 11 and 12.
Recommendation 5
The Aboriginal Water Entitlements Program funding should be at least doubled.
Agreed.
Refer to the response to Committee Recommendation 10.
Recommendation 6
An independent basin-wide audit must be undertaken to ensure the data, modelling and
methods underpinning the Plan are robust and based on science.
Agree in principle.
The Inspector-General of Water Compliance (the Inspector-General) monitors and provides
independent oversight of water compliance in the Basin. The Inspector-General may also
conduct inquiries on its own initiative.
The Australian Government has committed $103.7 million for the MDBA to prepare for and
deliver the Basin Plan Review. More than $150 million is being invested in up-to-date
science and modelling to underpin the future of the plan. In 2025 the MDBA published the
basin-wide Sustainable Rivers Audit, the Sustainable Yields Report, the Murray–Darling
Basin Outlook and the Basin Plan Evaluation to support the Basin Plan Review.
12
Recommendation 7
Any new iteration of the Murray–Darling Basin Plan must include climate change.
Noted.
Refer to the response to Committee Recommendation 14.
13
Senator Lidia Thorpe’s Additional Comments – Government
Response
Recommendation 1
Amend the Water Act 2007 to ensure water purchased through the Water for the
Environment Special Account (WESA) must provide for First Peoples’ water ownership,
including that any combined land and water package purchase facilitated through WESA
must be held, owned and managed by Basin First Nations and/or their nominated
representative organisations.
Not agreed.
The object of WESA is to enhance the environmental outcomes that can be achieved by the
Basin Plan, by:
a) protecting and restoring the environmental assets of the Murray–Darling Basin
b) protecting biodiversity dependent on the Basin water resources.
The proposed recommendation would change the fundamental object of the WESA.
Refer to response to Committee Recommendation 10.
Recommendation 2
Amend section 86AE to include a legislated minimum commitment of water from WESA
funds is transferred to Basin First Nations ownership.
Not agreed.
The Australian Government is pursuing First Nations water ownership through delivery of
Aboriginal Water Entitlements Program (AWEP).
Refer to the response to Senator Thorpe’s Recommendation 1.
Recommendation 3
The Bill should be further amended to ensure explicit recognition of Basin First Nations’
water rights and interests and associated objectives, including in the Objects of the Act
and aligning it with the UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP);
procedural justice and meaningful consultation for First Peoples, in line with the principles
of Free, Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC); First Peoples water access and ownership;
measures to ensure proper representation by First Peoples in all water resource plans and
the next iteration of the Basin Plan; and mechanisms to ensure that all water resource
plans and the next Basin Plan include First Peoples objectives and flows, as determined
by First Peoples themselves, supported by additional water recovery. Details on these
amendments are provided in Attachment A.
Noted.
14
The Restoring Our Rivers Act amends the:
• objects of the Water Act, and purposes of the Basin Plan, to ensure that the use and
management of the Basin water resources takes into account matters relevant to
First Nations Peoples.
• Statutory review provision of the Water Act to identify how the Water Act can
promote the UNDRIP principles.
• Basin Plan review provision to incorporate UNDRIP principles relating to
participation of Indigenous people in Basin water management.
Refer to the response to Senator Thorpe’s Recommendation 1 and Committee
Recommendations 9, 10, 11 and 12.
Recommendation 4
The Minister for Environment and Water must properly resource the Aboriginal Water
Entitlements Program (AWEP) to account for the lost value caused by delays; the
additional $50 million promised by the ALP for cultural water in 2019; and adjustments for
inflation. Factoring in these considerations would bring the total of the AWEP program
funding to approximately $120 million, at a minimum.
Agreed in part.
Refer to the response to Committee Recommendation 10.
Recommendation 5
The Albanese Government must make significant investment in Basin Nations’ preferred
representative bodies to determine appropriate water holding arrangements for
entitlements acquired through AWEP.
Agreed.
The Australian Government has made $9.2 million available to consult with First Nations
Peoples on the best way to hold and manage water entitlements for the benefit of all First
Nations Peoples, including water purchased through AWEP.
Refer to the responses to Senator Thorpe’s Recommendations 1 and 6.
Recommendation 6
Genuinely resource a comprehensive Basin-wide program of Cultural Flows without delay.
This must include properly resourcing every First Nation in the Basin, and their
representative bodies, with sufficient and highly skilled staff and adequate funding to fulfil
aspirations for genuine Cultural Flows projects.
Agreed in part.
The Australian Government has committed $20 million to support Basin First Nations
Peoples to plan for Cultural flows and water dependent economic opportunities.
15
Under the Cultural Flows program, successful applicants will have two years to deliver their
projects such as develop their cultural flows plans, develop water related business plans or
strengthen their governance. The program builds upon the important Cultural flows research
already undertaken by First Nations Peoples across Australia.
Recommendation 7
The Albanese Government must immediately begin a process of Truth-telling, to tell the
history of this place and allow First Peoples to heal. This will allow us to learn about the
ravages and destruction that our lands and waterways have occurred as a result of
colonisation and exploitation of First Peoples and our natural resources.
Noted.
This recommendation is not within the scope of the Restoring Our Rivers Act.
Recommendation 8
The Albanese Government must immediately begin a Treaty process with all Sovereign
First Peoples, which will enable all language groups to self-determine their own
aspirations in relation to water access, use and ownership.
Noted.
This recommendation is not within the scope of the Restoring Our Rivers Act.
Refer to the responses to Senator Thorpe’s Recommendations 5 and 6.
Recommendation 9
Establish a transition fund to support communities in the Basin impacted by over-
extraction, climate change, and water recovery. This must include a dedicated component
to address the detrimental impacts of poor water management on Basin First Nations, as
well as communities disproportionately impacted by climate change and reduced water
availability.
Agreed in part.
The Sustainable Communities Program provides $300 million to invest in Basin communities
to minimise the socio-economic impacts from water recovery. Funding is available to
facilitate regional, place-based engagement and to support communities to identify and
develop local initiatives. Community adjustment support principles include alignment with the
National Agreement on Closing the Gap. Basin states will be expected to consult with local
communities and First Nations Peoples as part of the development and delivery of transition
support programs in their jurisdictions.
Refer to the response to Committee Recommendation 6.
16
Recommendation 10
If the WESA account is chosen as the funding mechanism for the transition fund,
assurances must be made to ensure that adequate funding is available to support
communities while not impacting on water recovery measures and delivery of First
Peoples water outcomes.
Agreed.
The WESA is the funding mechanism for the Sustainable Communities Program.
Refer to the response to Senator Thorpe’s Recommendations 1 and 9.
Recommendation 11
The Albanese Government must make a substantial funding commitment to ensure the full
delivery of the Basin Plan, delivery of First Peoples water outcomes, and adequate
support for communities impacted by over-extraction, climate change and water recovery.
Agreed.
The Sustainable Communities Program provides $300 million to support Basin communities
adjust to the impacts of delivering the 450 GL target.
The Australian Government is also pursuing delivery of First Nations water outcomes and
has made substantial funding commitments through AWEP and Cultural flows planning.
Refer to the responses to Committee Recommendations 5, 6 and 9.
Recommendation 12
The Albanese Government must ratify UNDRIP into our domestic law as a matter of
urgency and commit to establishing a process for auditing existing legislation against the
principles of UNDRIP and developing a National Action Plan for implementation of
UNDRIP.
Noted.
This recommendation is not within the scope of the Restoring Our Rivers Act.
Refer to the responses to Committee Recommendation 9 and Senator Thorpe’s
Recommendation 3.
17
Recommendation 13
The Human Rights (Parliamentary Scrutiny) Act 2011 must be amended to include
UNDRIP in the list of international instruments, as well as additional provisions to ensure
that no Bill can pass before being considered by the committee and assessed for its
compliance with the principles of UNDRIP.
Not agreed.
This recommendation is not within the scope of the Restoring Our Rivers Act.
Refer to the response to Senator Thorpe’s Recommendation 3.
Recommendation 14
The Albanese Government must work in a collaborative manner with the Victorian
Government to ensure its participation and cooperation in the delivery of the Basin Plan,
including measures to ensure that northern Basin environmental outcomes are better
protected and connectivity are expressly targeted by the WESA. This engagement must
include all First Peoples whose lands and waters lie in so-called Victoria.
Agreed in part.
The Australian Government has and will continue to engage with a range of stakeholders on
Basin Plan delivery, including First Nations Peoples and the Victorian Government.
At the Murray–Darling Basin Ministerial Council meeting on 28 June 2024, all Basin
ministers welcomed a trial to protect environmental water’s passage from the northern Basin
into the southern Basin through the Menindee Lakes.
Recommendation 15
Substantial amendments must be made to the Bill to ensure the health of the rivers and
Country in the Basin and improve social, cultural and economic outcomes in the Basin.
Agreed.
Refer to the response to Australian Greens Recommendation 1.
18
Senator David Pocock’s Additional Comments – Government
Response
Recommendation 1
Increase flows into the Upper Murrumbidgee to a minimum of 21 per cent of natural
inflows, or 26–55 gigalitres per year.
Noted.
The Australian Government has committed up to $55.6 million to a range of activities to
improve river health in the Upper Murrumbidgee. Of these activities, two have the ability to
contribute to an increase in flows to the Upper Murrumbidgee: a review of the Snowy Water
Inquiry Outcomes Implementation Deed (long-term reform), as well as an interim Drought
Operating Framework and funding arrangement that can be drawn upon to support
additional water in the Upper Murrumbidgee in drought-like conditions.
The review is underway and has a focus on the upper Murrumbidgee River. Following the
review, Governments (Commonwealth, New South Wales, Victoria and the Australian
Capital Territory) will consider the recommendations and any implementation actions. Any
changes to the Deed will require agreement between the Deed parties (Commonwealth,
NSW and Vic).
While the Commonwealth and jurisdictions work through the review to investigate long term
solutions, the Australian Government set aside $10 million per year for three years from
2024-25, to provide additional water for the upper Murrumbidgee River in response to
drought-like conditions. The detail of this short-term response is detailed in the
Commonwealth’s Drought Operating Framework. The Framework provides the policy
settings for determining the drought-like conditions and operational release of water.
The Restoring Our Rivers Act requires the Minister to table an annual report on
environmental releases from the Snowy Scheme area. Two reports have been tabled to
date.
Recommendation 2
Guarantee critical human water needs for the ACT, Cooma and the region.
Agreed in principle.
Section 86A of the Water Act states that critical human water needs are the highest priority
water use for communities who are dependent on Basin water resources.
In developing WRPs under the Water Act 2007, Basin states must consider the allocation of
water for the purposes of meeting critical human water needs. As such, the WRPs set out
measures to meet critical human water needs during extreme events such as an extreme dry
periods or water quality concerns.
19
Recommendation 3
Adaptive management of Upper Murrumbidgee flows.
Agreed.
The Australian Government updated the Statement of Expectations for Snowy Hydro Limited
in 2024 to consider principles of social and environmental sustainability, and adaptive
management.
Recommendation 4
Monitoring and research program in the Upper Murrumbidgee.
Agreed.
The Australian Government has committed $5 million over five years from 2024–2025 for
science and monitoring as part of a program to improve river health and monitoring in the
Upper Murrumbidgee.
Refer to the response to Senator Pocock’s Recommendation 1.
Recommendation 5
Complementary measures in the Upper Murrumbidgee.
Agreed.
The Australian Government has committed $15 million over 3 years from 2024–25 to 2026–
27 as part of a program to improve the river health and environmental outcomes of the
Upper Murrumbidgee.
Recommendation 6
More water for First Nations.
Agreed.
Refer to the response to Committee Recommendation 10.
Recommendation 7
Set up an Invasive Species Solutions Research Fund.
Noted.
This recommendation is not within the scope of the Restoring Our Rivers Act.
20
