Australian Government response to the
Senate Environment and Communications References
Committee inquiry:
Climate Risk Assessment
MAY 2026
Introduction
The Senate Environment and Communications References Committee (the committee) was
tasked with undertaking an inquiry into the National Climate Risk Assessment on 26 August
2025. The Australian Government subsequently released the National Climate Risk
Assessment (NCRA) and the National Adaptation Plan (NAP) on 15 September 2025.
The committee released its report on 10 December 2025 after undertaking a public
submission process and public hearing, with recommendations relating to the NCRA and an
assessment by the Office of National Intelligence (ONI).
The NCRA represents a comprehensive overview of future climate risks and impacts, and
provides a new evidence base of best-available information to inform planning and action. It
looks at risks to people, communities, services, infrastructure, and the environment. The
NCRA was developed by the Australian Climate Service (ACS), which is a partnership
between the Bureau of Meteorology, CSIRO, the Australian Bureau of Statistics, and
Geoscience Australia, using the best available climate, hazard, geospatial and sectoral data.
The NAP provides the Australian Government’s policy framework to respond to findings of
the NCRA. It provides a vision for a well-adapted Australia, setting out current and
prospective actions in key sectors and principles to guide future action.
The Government recognises that the impacts of climate change are increasing, and that high
quality information is important to support Australians to take informed adaptation actions.
The Australian Government is working with states, territories, and local government to create
an action agenda for the National Adaptation Plan by the end of 2026, working through the
Energy and Climate Change Ministerial Council, to give effect to priority actions identified in
the NAP. The government will also support the provision of climate information through
entities such as the ACS, with regular updates made as further research and data becomes
available.
Response
Recommendation 1
4.9 The committee recommends that the Australian Government legislate a requirement
that the National Climate Risk Assessment process be undertaken with a report to be
tabled in the Australian Parliament within five years of the previous version being
released.
Response
Noted - The Australian Government recognises that the impacts of climate change are
increasing, and that high quality information is important to support Australians to take
informed adaptation actions. Australia’s first NCRA has established a nationally consistent
evidence base, drawing up integrated data, modelling and analysis from the ACS. This
framework provides ongoing capability to update climate risk information, monitor emerging
hazards, and support adaptation planning across governments, industry and communities.
Recommendation 2
4.12 The committee recommends that the Australian Government legislate a requirement
to respond to the risks outlined in the National Climate Risk Assessment (NCRA)
(including the costs of not taking action) and table this response in the Australian
Parliament within three months of the release of the NCRA.
Response
Noted - On 15 September 2025, the Australian Government released the National
Adaptation Plan (NAP) alongside the National Climate Risk Assessment. The NAP provides
the Australian Government’s policy framework to respond to findings of the NCRA. It
provides a vision for a well-adapted Australia, setting out current and prospective actions in
key sectors and principles to guide future action.
The Government has committed to working with states, territories, and local government to
create an action agenda for the National Adaptation Plan by the end of 2026, working
through the Energy and Climate Change Ministerial Council, to give effect to priority tasks.
Recommendation 3
4.18 The committee recommends that the Australian Government table a declassified
version of the report prepared by the Office of National Intelligence on the national
security threats posed by climate change in the Australian Parliament within three months.
Response
Not agreed - The Australian Government does not release ONI assessments that are
provided to the National Security Committee of Cabinet. Australia has a robust architecture
for identifying, analysing and managing security risks, and incorporates climate change
analysis into this existing framework to inform how the Government responds to these risks.
The work to address the strategic implications of climate change is a whole-of-government
endeavour. The Minister for Climate Change and Energy releases an Annual Climate
Change Statement that includes a Climate Change and National Security section. It details
the challenges that climate change poses to Australia’s security and the way in which these
can be managed into the future.
Agencies across the Commonwealth, including those in the national security community,
integrate climate change in their analysis, policies and relationships, and cooperate with
others to drive effective responses.
Senator David Pocock – Recommendation 1
1.17 That the Federal Government legislate a requirement for the Office of National
Intelligence to conduct annual assessments of the national security threats posed by
climate change, with a declassified version released publicly and tabled in Parliament.
Response
Not agreed - The Australian Government does not release ONI assessments that are
provided to the National Security Committee of Cabinet. Australia has a robust architecture
for identifying, analysing and managing security risks, and incorporates climate change
analysis into this existing framework to inform how the Government responds to these risks.
The work to address the strategic implications of climate change is a whole-of-government
endeavour. The Minister for Climate Change and Energy releases an Annual Climate
Change Statement that includes a Climate Change and National Security section. It details
the challenges that climate change poses to Australia’s security and the way in which these
can be managed into the future.
Agencies across the Commonwealth, including those in the national security community,
integrate climate change in their analysis, policies and relationships, and cooperate with
others to drive effective responses.
