Australian Government response to the
Human Rights sub-committee of the Joint Standing
Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade report:
Advocating for the elimination of child and forced
marriage
APRIL 2022
The Australian Government welcomes the report of the Human Rights sub-
committee of the Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence
and Trade, Advocating for the elimination of child and forced marriage, as
tabled on 2 December 2021.
The Government is strongly committed to combating child and forced
marriage1 domestically and advocating for the elimination of child and
forced marriage internationally. The government is committed to
addressing these practices through better understanding (research and
gender disaggregated data); addressing the drivers that make individuals
vulnerable to these practices, particularly using development assistance to
address gender inequality, improve access to education, and improve
livelihoods; and engaging with NGOs and relevant authorities to support
victims, including through the provision of consular services to Australians
in or at risk of forced marriage overseas.
Australia’s national action plan to combat modern slavery 2020-25, and
Australia’s international engagement strategy on human trafficking and
modern slavery: delivering in partnership set out specific actions and
commitments that the Australian government has made to address child
and forced marriage, as well as other forms of human trafficking and
modern slavery (HTMS).
The government agrees or agrees in principle with all recommendations in
the committee’s report.
1 Under Australian law, forced marriage occurs where someone is married without freely and fully consenting
to the marriage because of threats, deception or coercion, or the individual is incapable of understanding the
nature and effect of the marriage ceremony, or the individual is under the age of 16 years.
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Australian government support
efforts to collect gender-disaggregated data on the prevalence of child
and forced marriage globally.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government supports efforts to collect gender-disaggregated data on
the prevalence of child and forced marriage globally and commends the
organisations who work to quantify the prevalence of these hidden
practices.
Australia contributes unearmarked funds to the International Labour
Organization (ILO), who in partnership with the International Organization
of Migration (IOM) and Minderoo Foundation’s Walk Free initiative,
produces the Global Estimates of Modern Slavery, a key source of data on
the prevalence of forced marriage globally.
Australia continues to support UN Women’s flagship gender data program
Women Count (https://data.unwomen.org/women-count) to close data
gaps on priority gender equality issues in the Indo-Pacific region, including
on the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on gender equality and the rights
and empowerment of women and girls.
Through DFAT’s core contributions to UNICEF, we support UNICEF’s global
data collection efforts: https://data.unicef.org/topic/gender/harmful-
practices-and-intimate-partner-violence/
Australia contributes gender-disaggregated country data to these
international organisations, and the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime for its Global Report on Trafficking in Persons, which includes data on
trafficking for the purpose of forced marriage.
Australia supports UN Population Fund’s (UNFPA) kNOwVAWdata initiative
which helps countries in Asia and the Pacific to undertaken violence
prevalence surveys in line with international best practice, mostly using the
WHO Multi-Country Study on Women’s Health and Domestic Violence
survey and/or the Domestic Violence module of the Demographic and
Health Survey. These surveys measure intimate partner violence and non-
partner violence. Further work is being done by the international
community to measure child marriage.
(https://asiapacific.unfpa.org/en/knowvawdata).
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government improve
the publication of data on the child and forced marriage rates within
Australia, and in particular improve communication of this data to non-
government organisations supporting individuals in, or at risk of, child
and forced marriage.
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
Since 2007, the Australian Institute of Criminology’s (AIC) Human Trafficking
and Modern Slavery Research Program has contributed to understanding
of child and forced marriage in Australia through the dissemination of
research.
The AIC continues to build the evidence around the nature and prevalence
of child and forced marriage in Australia and is undertaking scoping work
to develop the Human Trafficking and Modern Slavery National Minimum
Dataset (NMDS).
Informed by the draft International Classification Standard for
Administrative Data on Trafficking in Persons recently developed by the
IOM in partnership with the UNODC, the proposed NMDS will provide unit-
record level information about individuals suspected of experiencing and
perpetrating HTMS-related offences in Australia on an ongoing basis. Key
information proposed for inclusion as part of the NMDS includes but is not
limited to:
• sociodemographic characteristics of individuals suspected of
experiencing and perpetrating modern slavery (eg. gender, age,
country of birth and visa status);
• report source (government and non-government) and government
agency contacts;
• form of modern slavery detected; and
• outcome of report/investigation.
Consistent with the IOM data collection principles, the AIC proposes that
the development and implementation of the NMDS will involve multiple
phases. The first phase involves the establishment of the basic
infrastructure of the HTMS NMDS, including the development of simple
indicators that provide information about the characteristics of suspected
victims and perpetrators of HTMS-related offences, the characteristics of
incidents and outcomes. The first phase will focus on key Commonwealth
government entities involved in Australia’s response to HTMS and is
anticipated to be finalised in 2022.
It is intended that further phases of the development of the NMDS will
explore options for sharing of aggregate-level findings from the analysis of
NMDS data with non-government entities as appropriate.
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government include
support for initiatives to eliminate child and forced marriage as part of
Australia’s aid program.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
Australia provides significant Official Development Assistance (ODA)
funding to programs and activities to address forced marriage directly in
high prevalence countries, as well as investments that address the broader
drivers of these practices and reduce the vulnerability of potential victims.
In particular, gender inequalities are a key driver of child and forced
marriage, as it impacts girls’ education, women’s livelihoods, and women’s
and girls’ health and wellbeing, legal rights and access to justice, being a
form of violence against women and girls.
Australia supports efforts to end violence against women and girls in all its
forms through our development and humanitarian programs. In the Indo-
Pacific region, our targeted assistance to address, prevent and respond to
gender-based violence includes additional funding of $10 million to UN
Women (2020-22) to support essential services for survivors, delivery of
prevention activities and assistance to local women’s organisations.
Australia’s humanitarian support focuses on ensuring basic assistance to at-
risk households to reduce dependence on negative coping mechanisms,
including child and forced marriage.
Australia also supports bilateral programs in 17 countries in the Indo-Pacific
to address, prevent and end violence against women and girls in all its
forms, including child and forced marriage. Australia’s work on gender-
responsive social protection, girls’ access to education, and in the health
sector contributes to addressing drivers for early and forced marriage. In
December 2021, the Philippines Government enacted legislation
criminalising child marriage, as part of strengthening development
cooperation, including on ending gender-based violence. Australia’s work
and support on Women, Peace and Security includes support for initiatives
to eliminate child and forced marriage investments. Globally, Australia is
supporting the Women’s Peace and Humanitarian Fund ($5.4 million, 2020-
22), a global financing mechanism to prevent conflict related sexual and
gender-based violence, including child and forced marriage.
Our work with the Pacific on gender equality through the Pacific Women
Lead program addresses gender inequality targeting both young girls and
women and young boys and men to address the gaps they face in services,
rights and opportunities. The Pacific Girl program is an example of a gender
equality initiative that has a strong focus on adolescent girls to ensure inter-
generational change. Australia’s partnership with the SPC (Pacific
Community) Regional Rights Resource Team (RRRT) is working to increase
observance to international human rights standards through improved
service delivery, access to justice and effective governance.
DFAT provides funding support to international organisations and local civil
society organisations in a number of high prevalence countries for child and
forced marriage, whose work includes advocacy and policy advice to
governments on legal and policy reforms and engagement at the
community level to shift attitudes and provide services and support to
persons (primarily girls) at risk of child and forced marriage.
Key examples of these investments include funding for the UN Population
Fund (UNFPA) in Iraq and Syria which includes the goal of advocating for
the eradication of child marriage; funding for Caritas and Plan International
in Lebanon to provide support to survivors of gender-based violence,
including child and forced marriage, and awareness sessions with men
which seek to change social norms on these issues. In Pakistan we support
policy and community dialogue on early and forced marriage through
funding for Trocaire and Oxfam.
In Indonesia, DFAT provided funding to local civil society organisations
through the Australia-Indonesia Partnership for Gender Equality and
Women’s Empowerment (MAMPU) and Australia Indonesia Partnership for
Justice - Phase 2 (AIPJ2) to work with the government to change
Indonesia’s Marriage Law to prevent child marriage. We are now supporting
civil society organisations to work with local governments at the
community level to socialise, implement and monitor these legal reforms in
high prevalence regions.
In Nepal, our Comprehensive Sexuality Education Program, with UNFPA, is
providing adolescent girls and boys with education on their sexual and
reproductive health rights and is helping to address harmful social norms
regarding child marriage. In Zimbabwe we support a number of NGOs that
build community support for ending gender-based violence in rural
Zimbabwean communities, including child and forced marriage; and
support Childline Zimbabwe to expand its call centre to provide
Zimbabwean girls with access to dedicated phone counselling and
psychological support services.
Many Australia Awards alumni – those who have studied in Australia
through the Australia Awards program – continue to be advocates for
gender equality and empowerment of girls. Several Australia Awards
alumni in Africa lead activities in their communities to end child and forced
marriage. Our Posts will continue to identify suitable activities in Africa for
Australian support, particularly at the community level, and including
Australia Awards alumni.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government continues
to support efforts to improve education outcomes for women and girls,
particularly in regions with high rates of child and forced marriage.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
Improved access to education has been shown to increase the age at which
girls marry. When they do marry, they are more likely to choose their
partner and to marry closer in age. Girls with fewer than seven years’
schooling are more likely to be married by age 18.
Educating girls improves labour market outcomes, reduces poverty, delays
marriage, reduces mortality and fertility rates, and increases GDP. A child
whose mother can read is 50 per cent more likely to live past the age of five,
50 per cent more likely to be immunised, and twice as likely to attend
school. There is evidence that ensuring that all girls finish secondary
education by 2030 could boost GDP by 10 per cent on average over the next
decade.
The DFAT 2020-21 budget outcome for education (including scholarships) is
$530 million. Bilateral, regional and global education programs prioritise
equity, particularly for girls, promoting safe, equitable and effective
education systems in the Indo-Pacific.
Australia has a longstanding relationship with the Global Partnership for
Education (GPE). The GPE is increasing opportunities for girls by
mainstreaming gender equality across all programming. Gender equality
features strongly in GPE Strategic Plan (2021-2025) for the delivery and
strengthening of education systems to address the specific gendered
barriers girls face. The Strategy includes specific actions (gender-responsive
planning and policy development, and sex disaggregated data) and
additional financing to countries where girls’ education has been identified
as a main challenge. The GPE is strengthening the inclusion of gender
equality in education programming in the COVID-19 response. GPE uses
rates of early marriage as one of the indicators for countries’ eligibility for an
additional financing window for priority countries through the Girls’
Education Accelerator (GEA).
Some specific examples of aid investments directed towards education
outcomes for women and girls in high prevalence countries for child and
forced marriage include: in Jordan supporting a project with the Jordanian
Ministry of Education to increase access to quality education for over
144,000 Syrian refugees, support for out of school adolescents to return to
learning through non-formal, certified education pathways, and support for
digital learning platforms to enable young people (particularly young
women) to continue their studies despite physical barriers to school
attendance; projects delivered by international organisations that
supported women and girls’ access to education in Chad; and small-scale
projects to improve education, literacy and skills for women and girls in
Kenya, Nigeria and Cameroon.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government continues
to enhance its engagement with community and faith-based groups
both in Australia and globally to hold dialogues and support work in
shifting social norms in relation to child and forced marriage.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government’s National Action Plan to Combat Modern Slavery 2020–
25 (National Action Plan) recognises that modern slavery is a complex crime
and government action is only part of the solution. Over the life of the
National Action Plan, the Government will continue to prioritise
collaboration with civil society, business, unions and academia, including
community and faith-based groups. This includes the provision of grant
funding to support the efforts of these groups to combat forced marriage in
Australia.
Human Trafficking Contact Officer Network
The Australian Border Force (ABF) has dedicated Human Trafficking
Contact Officers (HTCOs) who are onshore specialist officers located in all
states and territories. HTCOs are responsible for the Department of Home
Affairs’ and ABF’s operational responses to modern slavery (including forced
marriage) identified onshore, including by managing all referrals to the
Australian Federal Police and liaising with the Human Trafficking Unit in the
Department of Home Affairs. In the course of their duties, HTCOs may also
engage with civil society on modern slavery issues at a local level.
Community Liaison Officer Network
The Department of Home Affairs’ Community Liaison Officer (CLO) Network
continues to build trusted relationships with community and faith-based
leaders across Australia. CLOs have an essential role in supporting the social
cohesion mission by building and maintaining relationships with a wide
range of cultural, religious and ethnic communities around the country
including disseminating information to Culturally and Linguistically Diverse
(CALD) communities, reinforcing critical messaging, and understanding the
impact of the messaging on CALD communities. The CLO Network
facilitates open dialogue between communities and the Department by
delivering and seeking community feedback on whole-of-government
policy and program information.
The CLO Network has shared information about forced marriage with
community and faith-based groups, including by:
• disseminating the Department of Social Services’ Family Safety Pack
(which includes a factsheet on Forced and Early Marriage and is
available in 47 languages);
• amplifying the ABF’s 2021 World Day Against Trafficking in Persons
social media campaign, which included posts about forced marriage,
what it looks like in Australia and where to find help;
• regularly engaging with key community organisations to discuss
forced marriage and other forms of modern slavery in both physical
and online forums, including:
o the Forced Marriage and Human Trafficking Network meetings
convened by Anti-Slavery Australia and the Australian Red
Cross; and
o community organised meetings and forums to inform the
community of the Government’s commitment to combating
modern slavery through the National Action Plan.
The CLO Network will continue to engage in open dialogue with
community and faith-based leaders across Australia to share information
and hear and respond to community concerns in relation to forced
marriage.
AFP Community Liaison Teams
Community Liaison Teams (CLTs) provide pathways through which the AFP
and the community can build meaningful and productive relationships.
Though CLTs are focused on the prevention of terrorism and radicalisation,
they allow the AFP to build trust among vulnerable groups in the
community. The AFP have engaged with women leaders through these
CLTs to grow awareness and education on forced marriage. These
community leaders have expressed an interest in working more closely
with these teams in future to prevent a broader range of crime types.
‘Look a Little Deeper’
The AFP Human Trafficking frontline officer awareness package, “Look a
Little Deeper” (LALD), is currently delivered by the AFP to a vast array of
frontline responders across government, non-government organisations;
community; universities; and state and territory police. Recently sessions
have expanded to fields including education, medical, religious institutions,
financial institutions and industry. The LALD program aims to equip
participants with the skills necessary to identify and respond to indicators of
human trafficking and enhance victim safety. The AFP is currently
developing a bespoke version of the LALD package which will specifically
focus on education relating to forced marriage. The package will be
delivered to the community through our CLTs and is the first of its kind in
Australia.
Internationally
Australia continues to engage closely with community and faith-based
groups and their leaders, in our bilateral and multilateral investments to
end violence against women and girls. Our partners implement strong
monitoring, learning and evaluation approaches which enable continuous
improvement and fine-tuning of our engagement in accordance with the
context and the drivers of changes in social norms.
For example, the Pacific Church Partnerships Program (PCPP, $2 million
2019-2023) aims to build the leadership capabilities of Pacific Island church
leaders to contribute to development outcomes in the Pacific. The PCPP
provides bilateral and regional capacity building opportunities for Pacific
island church leaders, including female and young church leaders, and
strengthened partnerships between Pacific island and Australian church
leaders. The program is being adapted to assist Pacific churches to manage
the ongoing socio-economic impacts of COVID-19 on their communities,
while fostering links and cooperation with Australian churches and church
organisations. https://www.dfat.gov.au/geo/pacific/people-
connections/church-partnerships-in-the-pacific
Australia is also embarking on a four-year partnership with four Women
Funds, specifically, Women’s Fund Asia, Urgent Action Fund Asia-Pacific,
Women’s Fund Fiji, and later, a new Pacific Feminist Fund to expand their
work with women’s rights organisations and human rights defenders and
their advocacy to draw more resources for work towards gender equality
into these regions. Women’s Funds are particularly well positioned to
mitigate and address the impacts the COVID-19 pandemic, and potential
future health, social, or economic crises.
In Africa, the Australian Government supports community and faith-based
organisations working to eradicate child marriage. One such example is
Zambia Anglican Council Outreach Programme (ZACOP) which coordinate
‘Gender Action Groups’ to support women and girls in their communities
and prevent child marriages.
Australian Awards alumni also engage community elders, faith-based
leaders and political representatives to advocate for the elimination of child
and forced marriage.
The AFP works with our Pacific partners in combatting transnational crime
through information and intelligence sharing through the Pacific
Transnational Crime Network (PTCN).
Through the Pacific Community for Law Enforcement Corporation (PCLEC),
the AFP works closely with its Pacific partners to address Gender and
Family Harm, one of five strategic priorities of the PICP. PCLEC has
developed a number of initiatives to support enhanced capability and
consistent standards for policing Gender and Family Harm in the Pacific.
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government identify
opportunities to improve communication channels with key civil society
organisations, including leading a multi-stakeholder group of
government and key civil society organisations to develop a repatriation
protocol that enables prompt and streamlined assistance to Australians
overseas that are in, or at risk of, child and forced marriage.
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
DFAT works closely with relevant NGOs and other whole-of-government
partners to assist Australians who are victims of forced marriage overseas or
are at risk of forced marriage. DFAT has well-established communication
channels with Anti-Slavery Australia and other NGOs who provide support
to victims or potential victims of child and forced marriage. DFAT’s
Smartraveller website includes information on how these cases can be
referred to consular officers, including in countries where Australia does not
have an Embassy or Consulate.
DFAT works closely with relevant NGOs and other whole-of-government
partners to assist with the repatriation of vulnerable individuals on a case-
by-case basis. The circumstances of each case vary greatly and require a
tailored response and support. Repatriation to Australia is considered in
cases where it is considered in the best interests of the client. Repatriation
to Australia is not always the preferred outcome for the client, who may
prefer to remain in the country if they have necessary support networks, or
even be assisted to move to a third country.
The Government will work with NGOs to ensure communication channels
are well-understood and flexible to the needs of Australians who are victims
or could be victims of child and forced marriage overseas.
Australian consular officers take a victim-centred approach and take special
care to ensure the victim’s welfare is handled appropriately and sensitively.
We note that for consular purposes, the concept of ‘victim’ in a forced
marriage case includes clients who believe they are at a risk of forced
marriage as well as those already forced to marry.
Many high prevalence locations are countries where our capacity to provide
consular assistance is low. This includes locations where there is no
Australian representation or where adverse security conditions prevail. Due
to their extremely vulnerable position, consular officers provide these clients
the highest level of support available in the circumstances, noting that:
a) direct communication with the client may be difficult, and extreme
caution is exercised to guard against the risk of further harm; and
b) special assurances on confidentiality are likely to be required.
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government continues
and enhances funding to NGOs to counter child and forced marriage.
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
Since 2008, the Government has awarded over $7.8 million to support civil
society, business and academia to combat modern slavery in Australia,
including through awareness-raising and education initiatives. The 2020-21
Budget included $10.6 million over five years to implement the National
Action Plan, including $4.4 million in new grant funding.
The ‘National Action Plan to Combat Modern Slavery 2020-25
Grant Program’ (Grant Program) funds civil society, business and industry
groups and academia to deliver projects to combat modern slavery in
Australia, including research to support evidence-based policy.
The Grant Program is comprised of two multi-year grant funding
opportunities:
• Round One provides $1.67 million over a two-year period (2021/22–
2022/23), with $200,000 allocated to research.
o reflecting priorities and actions set out in the National Action
Plan, Round One includes a dedicated forced marriage stream.
• Round Two will provide up to $2.7 million over a three-year period
(2022/23–2024/25), with $200,000 allocated to research.
Round One of the Grant Program awarded $1.67 million to seven
organisations, including three projects aimed at combating forced
marriage in Australia.
DFAT provides funding support to international organisations and local civil
society organisations in a number of high prevalence countries, whose work
includes advocacy and policy advice to governments on legal and policy
reforms and engagement at the community level to shift attitudes and
provide services and support to those at risk of child and forced marriage.
Please see response to Recommendation 3 for examples.
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government maintains
Australia’s commitment as a regional and international leader by
conducting targeted and careful advocacy of efforts to prevent and
combat human trafficking and slavery, including child and forced
marriage.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
As reflected in Australia’s international engagement strategy on human
trafficking and modern slavery: delivering in partnership, the Government
advocates on child and forced marriage issues bilaterally and multilaterally,
and will continue to do so, taking into account local context and seeking
out governments in high-prevalence countries to encourage them to adopt
relevant laws.
This has included through co-sponsoring the biennial resolution in the UN
General Assembly Third Committee (Human Rights) on early and forced
marriage. It has also included support for the Human Rights Council (HRC)
resolutions on: child, early, and forced marriage; child, early and forced
marriage in times of crisis, including COVID-19; trafficking in persons,
especially women and children
Noting the prevalence of early and forced marriage in fragile and conflicted
affected states, on 12 April 2021 the Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs
and the Minister for Women, along with Minister for Defence and Minister
for Home Affairs, launched Australia’s next National Action Plan on Women,
Peace and Security 2021-2031 that seeks to reduce sexual and gender-based
violence, support law and justice efforts and meet the needs and rights of
women and girls.
Australia’s second National Action Plan on Women, Peace and Security
2021-2031 includes a medium term outcome (MTO) indicator, 2.2.2 on the
‘Proportion of women aged 20-24 who were married or in a union before
age 15 and before age 18’ (https://www.dfat.gov.au/publications/second-
australian-national-action-plan-on-women-peace-and-security-2021-2031)
which will be reported to Government in 2023, 2025, and 2028.
Consistent with our approach of regular advocacy on human rights issues,
the Australian Government regularly raises concerns about Child and
Forced Marriage with government officials. In Zimbabwe, for example,
Australian officials have encouraged amendments to the Marriages Act
under the Marriages Bill – a focus of which is the abolition of child marriage,
and the extension of minimum age requirements to customary law
marriages and civil partnerships. The Bill is currently awaiting review by the
Senate.
Australian Embassies/High Commissions in Africa will continue to use their
respective social media platforms to raise awareness about gender-based
violence and the rights of women and girls. This is a particular feature
during the annual 16 Days of Activism Against Gender-Based Violence. For
example, in 2021 the Australian Embassy in Harare hosted a roundtable
discussion for ‘International Day of the Girl Child’ to discuss the drivers of
child marriage in Zimbabwe and the impacts of COVID-19 in increasing
vulnerability of women and girls.
Regional engagement on human trafficking and related forms of
exploitation is addressed through the Bali Process on People Smuggling,
Trafficking in Persons and Related Transnational Crime. The Trafficking in
Persons Working Group of the Bali Process (co-chaired by the Australian
Border Force and Indonesia) has identified trafficking for the purposes of
forced marriage as an issue for consideration under its Forward Work Plan
2021–23.
The issue of trafficking for child or forced marriage has been identified by
DFAT’s ASEAN-Australia Counter Trafficking program as an emerging issue
in some countries in Southeast Asia, to further examine this, ASEAN-
Australia Counter Trafficking program (ASEAN-ACT) has commissioned a
study looking at the wide range of child protection risks facing children in
the ASEAN region.
Australia is a strong advocate for gender equality in bilateral and regional
forums in the Pacific and supports the Pacific’s regional commitments and
plans for gender equality, including the Pacific Leaders Gender Equality
Declaration 2012 and the Pacific Platform for Action on Gender Equality and
Women’s Human Rights (PPA). The PPA includes the right for women and
men of all ages to have equal rights in all areas of life including “the right to
choose their own partner” and “the right to decide for themselves the
future they want”.
AFP International Engagement and Capacity Building:
The AFP’s International Network provides investigative assistance and
capacity uplift to foreign law enforcement in relation to a range of crime
types including modern slavery and human trafficking. The AFP has 166
members posted to 33 countries, all of whom are provided with LALD
training.
The AFP continues international efforts, co-hosting international workshop
and conferences aimed at boosting the skills, confidence and influence of
local and cross-border police investigators, including:
o International delivery of a four-day Human Trafficking
Investigations Program.
o Support and participation in International Human Trafficking
Investigation Workshops which reflects the importance of
international partnerships in countering human trafficking and
slavery-related matters.
o Ongoing support to the World Congress on Family Law and
Children’s Rights, which the AFP has supported for over 15
years.
o AFP Human Exploitation Command working with International
Command on the development and delivery of LALD
awareness packages internationally.
Recommendation 9
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government continues
and enhances its engagement in bilateral and multilateral dialogues to
eliminate child and forced marriage.
The Government accepts this recommendation.
As reflected in Australia’s international engagement strategy on human
trafficking and modern slavery: delivering in partnership, Australia
addresses forced marriage with international partners through bilateral,
regional and multilateral engagement, development programming,
humanitarian assistance and advocacy.
Australia draws on our extensive diplomatic network to inform our policy
approach, influence partner government policy and make strategic
contributions both in bilateral and multilateral forums to end the practice
of child and forced marriage.
Agencies across the Australian Government contribute to the multilateral
fora that address human trafficking and other forms of modern slavery,
which include human rights bodies, such as the UN Human Rights Council
and UN General Assembly Third Committee; and criminal justice-related
bodies, such as meetings of the States Parties of the UN Convention against
Transnational Organized Crime, and UN Congress on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice.
The Australian Government regularly makes recommendations to
encourage countries to adopt legislation to ban early and forced marriages
through our country statements through the Universal Periodic Review
Process of the United Nations Human Rights Council. Recent examples
include country statements for Mozambique (2021), and Somalia (2021).
In particular, the Australian Government has a strong record of advocacy in
multilateral human rights forums, such as the UN Human Rights Council
and UN General Assembly, ensuring the language agreed by UN member
states to characterise child, early and forced marriage reflects the
seriousness of these violations and the complexity of the drivers.
Australia continues to advocate for the elimination of child, early and forced
marriage through our multilateral engagement. For example, in 2021,
Australia:
- Co-led with Spain of a Joint Statement on Afghanistan women’s and
girls’ human rights at the 31st Special Session of the Human Rights
Council on 24 August 2021, which was supported by 69 member
states. https://www.dfat.gov.au/international-
relations/themes/human-rights/hrc-statements/31st-special-session-
human-rights-council/joint-statement-afghanistan-womens-and-
girls-human-rights-24-august-2021
- Joined a statement on Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights at
the 47th Session of the HRC (June-July 2021), which highlighted the
impact of COVID-19 on child and early forced marriage -
https://www.dfat.gov.au/international-relations/themes/human-
rights/hrc-statements/47th-session-human-rights-council/joint-
statement-sexual-and-reproductive-health-and-rights-during-
annual-full-day-discussion-human-rights-women-6-july-2021
- Delivered a joint statement on trafficking in persons, especially
women and girls at the 47th Session of the HRC (June-July 2021) -
https://www.dfat.gov.au/international-relations/themes/human-
rights/hrc-statements/47th-session-human-rights-council/joint-
statement-interactive-dialogue-special-rapporteur-trafficking-
delivered-australia-29-june-2021
- Co-sponsored a resolution on Child Early and Forced marriage in
times of crisis, including COVID-19 at the 48th Session of the HRC
(September-October 2021) - https://documents-dds-
ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/G21/287/57/PDF/G2128757.pdf?OpenElem
ent
- Co-sponsored a resolution on the Rights of the Child at the 76th
Session of the UN General Assembly (September-November 2021) –
which condemns child, early and forced marriage -
https://documents-dds-
ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N21/402/13/PDF/N2140213.pdf?OpenElem
ent

