Australian Government response to the Senate Standing
Committees on Environment and Communications
report:
Offshore wind industry consultation process
MARCH 2026
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the Senate Environment and Communications
References Committee Report from the Inquiry on the offshore wind industry consultation
process.
Offshore wind provides reliable, large-scale generation at times of the day or night that
complement onshore renewables, delivering a more consistent, cleaner energy supply. As
well as providing reliable, renewable electricity throughout the day, offshore wind can keep
generating into the evening, harnessing the consistent, high-speed winds of the Australian
coastline. Harnessing our natural resources in wind means creating thousands of
construction jobs and ongoing maintenance roles in local supply chains, ports and regional
communities.
The Offshore Electricity Infrastructure Act 2021 (OEI Act) regulates the construction,
installation, commissioning, operation, maintenance, and decommissioning of offshore
electricity infrastructure (OEI) projects in the Commonwealth offshore area, such as offshore
wind projects. The OEI Act operates under the principle of shared use of the offshore marine
environment and aims to balance competing interests. Australia’s marine waters are used for
a diverse range of recreational and commercial activities. Understanding these activities and
existing marine users in and near potential offshore wind areas is essential to enable co-
existence.
As stated by the then Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction the Hon Angus Taylor
MP in his second-reading speech:
“International experience shows that offshore electricity sectors coexist with other offshore
sectors and activities, such as fishing and shipping industries. This bill protects these
maritime stakeholders by requiring developers to take into account the impacts that potential
projects may have on existing users of the offshore area. Importantly, under the bill, areas
will not be available for offshore electricity infrastructure projects if their impacts cannot be
appropriately managed and enforcement action can be taken if licence holders interfere with
existing users of a declared area”.
While the Government has now concluded the declaration process for offshore wind zones
in Australia, it continues to support good community engagement across the Energy and
Climate portfolio:
• Establishment of Wind Industry Committees for areas where there are offshore
feasibility licences
• Making regulatory amendments to the Offshore Electricity Infrastructure to strengthen
community consultation
• Responding to the recommendations of the Community Engagement Review
conducted by the Australian Energy Infrastructure Commissioner,
• Establishment of a national Developer Rating Scheme
The Committee tabled its report on 5 June 2025, making five recommendations.
The Coalition Senators’ Dissenting Report makes four recommendations.
The Government has provided a response to recommendations of the Committee below.
Response
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the
Environment and Water (DCCEEW) consider ways to improve engagement with relevant
First Nations and Traditional Owner groups in areas declared suitable for offshore wind
developments.
Government Response: Agree
The Government recognises the importance of meaningful engagement with First Nations
communities in the declared offshore wind areas. This engagement is essential to ensuring
that offshore renewable energy development respects cultural heritage and delivers shared
benefits.
In 2024, the department made regulatory amendments to the Offshore Electricity
Infrastructure Act 2021 (OEI Act 2021) embedding specific provisions for consultation with
First Nations and Traditional Owner Groups. The Offshore Electricity Infrastructure
Regulations 2022 (OEI Regulations) require licence holders to make reasonable efforts to
identify and consult Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people or groups described in
regulation 64(1) as:
• 64(1)(b) First Nations people or groups with Native Title rights and interests
• 64(1)(c) First Nations organisations established under law to manage lands and
waters
• 64(1)(d) First Nations organisations or groups that are parties to agreements for land
and water rights
Consultation with First Nations groups must be addressed in a management plan and
approved by the Offshore Infrastructure Regulator before offshore infrastructure activities
can commence. As of 1 December 2025, five licence holders in the Gippsland offshore wind
area have approved management plans for feasibility activities.
The Government has developed guidance for offshore renewables developers for
consultation with First Nations people. These guidelines provide an overview of the
government’s expectations and requirements for consultation and ensure that industry meets
expected standards in its approach to engaging with First Nations people.
In Gippsland, the most advanced of all six declared areas, licence holders are building
relationships with First Nations groups. Gippsland licence holders Iberdrola Australia and
Blue Mackerel signed historic engagement agreements with Gunaikurnai Land and Waters
Aboriginal Corporation (GLaWAC) in March and May 2025 respectively.1 2 These
agreements create a pathway for the First Nation groups to shape the engagement process,
involving them in decision-making, building mutually respectful and beneficial partnerships,
and ensuring First Nations rights and interests are considered in projects.
In June 2025, the department released its First Nations Engagement: the principles of Free,
Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) guidelines3. The guidelines provide departmental staff
with guidance to building honest and meaningful relationships with First Nations people and
communities when undertaking engagement and ensuring conversations are informed and
consistent.
The FPIC guidelines complement outcome two of the department’s First Nations Strategy
2025-30, which outlines the departments aspirations for early and genuine engagement with
First Nations people and communities, ensuring communications are consistent, and
facilitating First Nations involvement.
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that DCCEEW engagement during public consultation
processes provide targeted and localised information for each declared area. This should
include a meaningful, physical presence to provide information, listen to concerns, and
help the local community to feed into management plans and desired community benefit
from projects.
Further, DCCEEW should improve its communication with local communities to provide a
clear narrative about the broader context of offshore renewable energy, including the need
to transition away from ageing fossil fuel generation assets and other reasons for the
energy transition.
Government Response: Agree
The Government recognises the important role of in-person engagement to facilitate
effective public consultation and is committed to fostering meaningful interactions that build
public understanding.
The OEI Act framework includes several opportunities for stakeholders to have their say on
where offshore renewable energy developments may be located and how they should be
managed.
In the feasibility licensing stage, licence holders are responsible for undertaking consultation
with stakeholders on their projects. Consultation undertaken must be detailed in the licence
holder’s management plan. Licence holders are also required to develop a stakeholder
engagement strategy which sets out plans for ongoing engagement with stakeholders.
1 Gunaikurnai Land and Waters Aboriginal Corporation, GLaWAC and Blue Mackerel Build a New Model for Offshore Wind,
Gunaikurnai website, May 2025, accessed 29 July 2025
2 Gunaikurnai Land and Waters Aboriginal Corporation, Landmark Agreement Ensuring Gunaikurnai Voice in Offshore Wind
Feasibility, Gunaikurnai website, March 2025, accessed 29 July 2025
3 Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water (DCCEEW), First Nations Engagement: the principles of
Free, Prior and Informed Consent, 2025
Detailed environmental studies and approvals are undertaken during the feasibility stage,
and public consultation is undertaken through the Environment Protection and Biodiversity
Conservation Act 1999 approvals process.
To facilitate ongoing engagement with communities, the Government is establishing Wind
Industry Committees, bringing together licence holders with representatives from the local
community, industry, workers representatives, First Nations groups, educational institutions
and state and local governments to discuss local benefits.
Wind Industry Committees will enable broad engagement to maximise economic benefits for
each region, including communities, workers and local businesses. The committees will be
chaired by the department, and include licence holders, enabling the community to discuss
the projects and potential local benefits directly with licence holders.
The Southern Ocean Wind Industry Committee has already been established, and the
Government is currently finalising arrangements for Wind Industry Committees in the other
offshore wind regions as licensing processes are finalised.
Departmental staff have an ongoing attendance at the Gippsland offshore wind days. The
community engagement events are organised by feasibility licence holders in regional
locations in Gippsland, Victoria and provide an opportunity for community members to
engage with licence holders, Victorian government representatives and the department to
learn more about offshore wind projects in the area.
The department recognises the importance of a clear narrative on offshore renewable
energy in the broader context of the Net Zero transition.
In conjunction with states and territories, the government, through the Energy and Climate
Change Ministerial Council (ECMC), is implementing the recommendations to the Australian
Energy Infrastructure Commissioner’s (AEIC) Community Engagement Review, which
recommended ways to improve community engagement in the renewable energy transition.
Recommendation 6 of this review specifically recommended developing a clear narrative on
why there is an urgent need for new renewable energy and transmission infrastructure in
communities. To address this the government has:
• Developed the First Nations Clean Energy Strategy
• Committed to further funding for the AEIC to provide guidance to communities to
support their understanding of large-scale renewable energy and transmission
infrastructure.
• Committed $209.3 million over four years from 2024-25 to expand the Net Zero
Economy Authority to support workers through the transition to net zero
The ECMC also committed to a behavioural research project that included engagement with
local communities where renewable energy infrastructure is being deployed to ensure states
and territories as well as the Commonwealth can more effectively communicate.
The department will continue to support further opportunities to improve public
communication and engagement processes to ensure local communities can participate in
renewable energy developments as Australia’s energy transition progresses.
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that DCCEEW in conjunction with the Offshore Infrastructure
Regulator, oversee ongoing engagement from proponents with local businesses, worker
representatives, marine users, and community groups as a central point for engagement.
Government Response: Agree
The department has established a Wind Industry Committee in the Southern Ocean offshore
wind region and is finalising arrangements for Wind Industry Committees in other offshore
wind regions as licensing processes progress. The department has established the
Gippsland Licence holder Advisory Committee to coordinate activities by licence holders
across the broader Gippsland offshore wind region.
These committees will provide a forum for stakeholders, including First Nations groups, local
businesses, and community representatives to engage directly with the feasibility licence
holders and government agencies. Terms of Reference for the WICs are available on the
department’s website. The Southern Ocean Wind Industry Committee had its inaugural
meeting on the 22 July 2025.
The Offshore Infrastructure Regulator independently oversees consultation and engagement
between the licence holder and consultees through the management plan and assessment
process.
In accordance with the OEI Regulations, management plans must address consultation
carried out by the licence holder including the process used to identify consultees, a
comprehensive list of the persons, organisations, communities and groups consulted and a
report on the outcomes of consultation. Management plans must also include a description
of a Stakeholder Engagement Strategy (SES).
The Regulator may only approve a management plan if satisfied the management plan
addresses the requirements of the OEI Regulations including that the SES provides for
ongoing engagement with stakeholders.
Licence holders are required to publish their SES on their respective project websites to
increase transparency of licence activities. Publication of the SES also enables stakeholders
who believe they should be consulted the opportunity to self-identify and directly contact the
licence holder for engagement over the life of the project.
The Offshore Infrastructure Regulator will monitor the licence holder's compliance with the
management plan once approved and take action where necessary to ensure the plan is
being followed.
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends the Australian Government and DCCEEW proactively ensure
that foreign actors, spam engagement, and misinformation and disinformation do not
overpower local community voices from being heard in local public debate.
Government Response: Agree
While local questions and concerns are often legitimate, the Government recognises the
ongoing challenge of misinformation in local public debate on renewable energy.
Following the Australian Government’s formal response to the 2024 AEIC Community
Engagement Review, the department has strengthened its focus on proactive, community-
centred communication, funding research to better understand information gaps and sources
of misinformation around renewable energy infrastructure.
The department is committed to providing credible, accessible, and timely information to
communities to help build an understanding of offshore wind and renewable energy and
address misinformation and 'negative narratives'. The department will continue to ensure
that fact-based information on offshore wind is available on its website, through social media
channels and through stakeholder engagement activities.
The ECMC committed to a behavioural research project that included engagement with local
communities where renewable energy infrastructure is being deployed to ensure states and
territories as well as the Commonwealth can more effectively communicate.
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends that the Australian Government amend the Offshore
Electricity Act 2021 to require public consultation on management plans submitted to the
Offshore Infrastructure Regulator, prior to approval of the plan for construction activities
and the granting of a commercial licence.
Government Response: Agree in principle
To reduce economic barriers and enhance transparency and community confidence in
offshore renewable energy projects, the government has committed to undertake targeted
consultation on ways to enable public comment on management plans for commercial
projects in the OEI sector.
The government intends to amend the OEI Regulations to require an additional round of
public consultation on the summary of the proposed management plan for a commercial
licence as a pre-condition to the Offshore Infrastructure Regulator’s approval or refusal to
approve a management plan for a commercial licence.
Dissenting Recommendation 1
The offshore wind zones declared in the Hunter, Illawarra, Southern Ocean and Indian
Ocean be cancelled.
Government Response: Reject
The Australian Energy Market Operator continually tells us that renewable energy, backed
by storage and gas is the cheapest way to provide power to homes. Coal fired power
stations are ageing and with their retirement approaching the Government is committed to
exploring all options to deliver more renewable energy into the grid. Offshore wind is a key
part of that plan.
As a large scale, secure, reliable and clean energy source, offshore wind can contribute to
energy security, reliability and affordability while supporting our heavy industry to
decarbonise and remain competitive.
Dissenting Recommendation 2
The Senate hold a second inquiry where formal public hearings are held in all six
communities which will be impacted by the offshore wind zones declared by the Albanese
Government to identify lessons learnt which can be applied to community engagement for
all future new electricity infrastructure.
Government Response: Noted
Dissenting Recommendation 3
The Australian Government adopts principles to govern new electricity infrastructure which
places communities at the centre, and makes decisions which account for the interests of
local communities in terms of economic, environmental, and social impacts.
Government Response: Agree in principle
The department adopted principles from the APS framework for engagement and
participation4 in designing the public consultation process for the declared areas. The
guidance and engagement tools provide the standard intended to apply to engagement in
the Australian public sector.
To enable the consideration of local community interests in projects the department has
established a Wind Industry Committee in the Southern Ocean offshore wind region and is
finalising arrangements for Wind Industry Committees in other offshore wind regions as
licensing processes progress.
Wind Industry Committees will enable broad engagement to maximise economic benefits for
each region, including communities, workers and businesses. The committees will be
4 Department of Industry, Science and Resources, (2021) APS framework for engagement and participation
chaired by the department, and include licence holders, enabling the community to discuss
the projects and potential local benefits directly with licence holders.
In accordance with the OEI Regulations, management plans must address consultation
carried out by the licence holder including the process used to identify consultees, a
comprehensive list of the persons, organisations, communities and groups consulted and a
report on the outcomes of consultation. Management plans must also include a description
of a Stakeholder Engagement Strategy (SES).
The Regulator may only approve a management plan if satisfied the management plan
addresses the requirements of the OEI Regulations including that the SES provides for
ongoing engagement with stakeholders.
Licence holders are required to publish their SES on their respective project websites to
increase transparency of licence activities. Publication of the SES also enables stakeholders
who believe they should be consulted the opportunity to self-identify and directly contact the
licence holder for engagement over the life of the project.
Dissenting Recommendation 4
For all new and emerging energy technology and major infrastructure, where robust
impact assessments are not readily available, extend the minimum public consultation and
review period from 60 days to 180 days to allow for stakeholder engagement, expert
analysis and public scrutiny.
Government Response: Noted
The Offshore Electricity Infrastructure Act 2021 established by the former Government
requires that the public consultation period must be at least 60 days from the notice of the
proposal to declare an area and allows the Minister to consult for longer periods.
