Australian Government response to the
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Committee Report:
Criminal Code Amendments (Hate Crimes) Bill 2024
Introduction
The Australian Government thanks the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation
Committee for its review of the Criminal Code Amendment (Hate Crimes) Bill 2024.
There is no place in Australia for hatred or discrimination of any kind and the Government
unequivocally condemns this behaviour. Over the last several years, Australia has seen an
increase in hate-motivated violence, vilification, oppression and abuse which has targeted
specific individuals or groups within our diverse society.
The Government introduced amendments to the Bill implementing the Committee’s
recommendations on 5 February 2025. The Bill passed the Parliament on 6 February 2025.
The measures in the Bill deliver the toughest laws Australia has ever had against hate crimes.
The Government thanks the Committee for its consideration and recommendations.
Recommendations
Recommendation 1: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government
amends item 20 in Schedule 1 of the Bill, to include ‘disability’ as a protected attribute,
subject to the identification of a constitutional head of power.
Response: The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Criminal Code Amendment (Hate Crimes) Act 2025 (the Act) includes ‘disability’ as a
protected attribute in subsections 80.2H(7), 80.2HA(7) and 80.2K(6) of the Criminal Code
Act 1995 (Criminal Code). ‘Disability’ as a protected attribute is defined by reference to the
meaning under the Disability Discrimination Act 1992 (Cth) in subsection 80.1A of the
Criminal Code.
Recommendation 2: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government
progresses amendments to extend the criminal offences in sections 80.2A and 80.2B and
proposed sections 80.2BA and 80.2BB of the Criminal Code Act 1995, to include urging
violence or threats of violence being directed at associates of protected groups.
Response: The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Act extends protections against advocating or threatening violence, and advocating or
threatening damage to property, for close associates in sections 80.2A, 80.2B, 80.2BA,
80.2BB, 80.2BC and 80.2BD of the Criminal Code. Close associates include close family
members for all protected groups, and carers or assistants of individuals with a disability.
Recommendation 3: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government
considers establishing a national hate crimes database.
Response: The Australian Government agrees-in-principle to this recommendation.
Commonwealth, state and territory governments have agreed to work together to establish a
national database to track all hate-motivated crimes and incidents. A single national reporting
system will better inform responses to hate crimes, and support more accurate national public
reporting. On 2 October 2025, the Police Ministers Council agreed to provide existing data
based on statistical information in current systems to support the establishment of the first
phase of the database by the end of 2025.
The Commonwealth is leading a working group with state and territory representatives on the
development of the database, which is continuing to consider a range of issues to enhance the
database. Through this work the Government will consider a nationally consistent definition
of what constitutes a hate crime.
Recommendation 4: The Committee recommends that the Senate passes the Bill when
Parliament returns in 2025.
Response: The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Criminal Code Amendment (Hate Crimes) Bill 2025 was passed by the Senate on 6
February 2025.
Senator Paul Scarr additional recommendation
Recommendation: That the offences be expanded to include the urging or threatening
of attacks against places of worship.
Response: The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Act includes new offences for advocating or threatening damage to, or destruction of,
real property, including places of worship, or a motor vehicle, in sections 80.2BC and
80.2BD of the Criminal Code.
The Government also agreed to an amendment moved by the Opposition to introduce new
section 80.2BE of the Criminal Code, which creates new criminal offences for advocating
force or violence through causing damage to property.
Australian Greens additional recommendation
Recommendation 1: That the Australian Government enacts a comprehensive federal
Human Rights Act.
Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government is considering this recommendation in the context of the
recommendations of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights’ inquiry into
Australia’s Human Rights Framework.
Recommendation 2: That the Australian Government commits to fully funding and
implementing the National Anti-Racism Framework.
Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Government believes that there is no place in Australia for racism or discrimination of
any kind.
The Government is taking a number of actions as part of its multifaceted approach to
addressing complex experiences of racism in the community, with initiatives already
underway across a range of portfolios. This includes appointing the Special Envoy to Combat
Antisemitism and Special Envoy to Combat Islamophobia and passing legislation to
strengthen offences for urging force or violence against groups or members of groups and
creating new offences for threatening force or violence against groups or members of groups.
Recommendation 3: That the Bill be amended to include ‘gender expression’ as a
protected attribute in relation to all offences.
Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The federal Sex Discrimination Act 1984 makes it unlawful to discriminate on the basis of
sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, intersex status, marital or relationship status,
pregnancy or potential pregnancy, breastfeeding and family responsibilities in certain areas of
public life. The Bill includes protected attributes and definitions that are consistent with the
Sex Discrimination Act. Any amendments to language used throughout this Bill would need
to be considered in a way that ensures consistency and compatibility of the Bill with other
federal legislation.
Recommendation 4: That the Bill be amended to replace ‘intersex status’ with ‘sex
characteristics’, and consideration be given to updating the use of the term ‘intersex
status’ in other Commonwealth laws.
Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Bill includes protected attributes and definitions that are consistent with the Sex
Discrimination Act 1984. Any amendments to the language used throughout the Bill would
need to be considered in a way that ensures consistency and compatibility across federal
legislation.
