Australian Government response to the Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee report:
Criminal Code Amendment (Genocide, Crimes Against
Humanity and War Crimes) Bill 2024
MAY 2026
Recommendation Government Response
Committee Report
1 The committee recommends that the Senate does Noted. Consistent with this recommendation, the Senate negatived the Bill on 26
not pass the Bill. March 2024 and it is not proceeding.
Dissenting Report
1 That the Senate pass the Bill. The Government notes all recommendations set out in Senator Thorpe’s
2 That section 16.1 of the Criminal Code (Cth) be dissenting report.
revoked to remove the Attorney-General’s fiat from
cases of universal jurisdiction. The Government reaffirms its longstanding commitment to upholding
3 That an independent, specialised international international law, including meeting Australia’s obligations under international
crimes investigation unit be established and humanitarian law, the Genocide Convention and the Rome Statute of the
adequately resourced. International Criminal Court.
4 That, if the Senate does not pass this Bill:
1. clear legislative guidance setting out the Australia has created equivalent offences to those of the Rome Statute through
factors to be considered in the Division 268 of the Criminal Code (Cth), which criminalises genocide, crimes
Attorney-General’s decision-making when against humanity and war crimes. Extended geographical jurisdiction applies to
exercising discretion under the offences under Division 268. This framework ensures Australia has the legal
Attorney-General’s fiat be developed and capacity to investigate and prosecute alleged atrocities regardless of where they
enacted occur. Investigations are undertaken by the Australian Federal Police, and
2. the Attorney-General be required to give decisions to prosecute are made independently by the Office of the
reasons for their decision to give or refuse Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions in accordance with the
consent in line with these guidelines, and Prosecution Policy of the Commonwealth.
3. these reasons be made accessible to the public.
5 That, if the Senate does not pass this Bill, the The prosecution of international crimes may raise complex and sensitive issues,
decision of the Attorney-General under section including questions of international law, immunities, foreign relations, national
268.122 to give or refuse consent to institute security, whether Australia is the most appropriate forum for a prosecution, and
proceedings for an offence under Division 268 can the need for consultation and coordination with other countries. Consistent with
be subject to review or appeal, particularly long‑standing Commonwealth practice, the Attorney‑General’s consent
under the Administrative Decisions (Judicial requirement enables these matters to be taken into account while preserving the
Review) Act 1977 (Cth). independence of investigative and prosecutorial decision‑making.
6 When the CDPP exercises its discretion not to refer
a case of genocide or crimes against humanity to
2
Recommendation Government Response
the Attorney-General, that this decision be made Consent to prosecute provisions commonly involve a broad discretion, reflecting
publicly available, and be subject to judicial review. the fact‑specific and sensitive nature of such decisions. Although some provisions
7 That there be established a National Inquiry or prescribe matters to be considered, the Attorney‑General is not required to apply
Royal Commission into genocidal practices in set criteria or provide reasons for consent decisions, and the Government
Australia against its First Peoples, assessing both considers this flexibility an important feature of the existing framework
historical and contemporary practices and their
impacts. It could investigate both past policies and The Government notes that consent to prosecute provisions are not unique to
present issues, such as child removals, mass these types of crimes and appear throughout Commonwealth legislation in
incarceration, and forced assimilation policies, relation to offences involving significant public interest, international or national
addressing structural racism in policy and practice. security considerations. The operation of Division 268 also reflects approaches
8 That the Australian Government acknowledges the adopted in other jurisdictions with comparable legal systems.
historical and ongoing genocide of this country’s
First Peoples. The Government notes the views expressed in the dissenting report concerning
9 That there be established an Autonomous First Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. The Government remains
Nations Genocide Court that operates committed to ensuring that domestic legislation and policies comply with
independently of the existing judicial system and is international law.
specifically empowered to address crimes of
genocide, systemic discrimination, and land The Government understands the leadership role it must play to drive systemic
dispossession, and is endowed with both change for First Nations people and is committed to improving outcomes. On
prosecutorial and restorative powers. 4 March 2026, the Joint Standing Committee on Aboriginal and Torres Strait
10 That there be established a reparations program that Islander Affairs adopted an inquiry into racism, hate and violence directed at First
is designed, implemented, and controlled by First Nations people, following a referral from the Minister for Indigenous Australians,
Nations communities to address the lasting impacts Senator the Hon Malarndirri McCarthy. The Committee is due to report by
of colonisation, dispossession, and family 15 September 2026.
separation policies. This program should include
financial compensation, cultural restoration, More broadly, the Government recognises the importance of continued
support for community-driven education and engagement with affected communities and organisations, as well as international
healthcare initiatives, and extensive land restitution partners, and remains committed to maintaining a robust, lawful and effective
measures, in addition to any other measures framework for responding to allegations of the most serious international crimes.
identified by the community.
3
