Australian Government response to the
Senate Committee Economics report:
Inquiry into Scams Prevention Framework Bill 2024
[Provisions]
May 2026
Introduction
The Australian Government thanks the Senate Economic Legislation Committee for its consideration of
the Scams Prevention Framework Bill 2024.
Introduction | 1
Response to the recommendations
Coalition Senators’ Additional Comments Recommendation 3
The government create a Memorandum of Understanding clearly setting out the roles of the SPF
Regulators (ACCC, ASIC, ACMA), the SPF EDR scheme operator (AFCA) and the National Anti-Scam
Centre in relation to the operation of the SPF.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government moved amendments to the Bill to require the SPF General Regulator to publish a
statement on its website summarising, in general terms, the roles and responsibilities of each SPF
regulator, the SPF EDR scheme operator and any other entity it considers relevant.1
The Government notes that the National Anti-Scam Centre cannot be required to enter a
Memorandum of Understanding as it is a function within the ACCC, not a statutory body.
Coalition Senators’ Additional Comments Recommendation 5
The Explanatory Memorandum be revised to:
clarify the interoperability of the SPF with the existing legal rights for victims of unauthorised
transactions under the ePayments Code; and
replace the Regulatory Impact Analysis to ensure it accurately reflects the likely regulatory burden
of the SPF and uses realistic costing assumptions based on industry feedback.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The explanatory memorandum (EM) was revised to address concerns on the interaction between
the ePayments Code and the SPF, making clear that regulated entities must comply with all
relevant requirements under each regime.2
Treasury conducted an Impact Analysis on the SPF, which included an estimation of the expected
regulatory burden of the SPF as set out in the exposure draft legislation based on available
information and assumptions informed by engagement with relevant stakeholders, including
public consultation.
1 Scams Prevention Framework Act 2025, s 58EFA
2 Amended Explanatory Memorandum, Scams Prevention Framework Act 2025, paragraph 1.69
2 | Response to the recommendations
Coalition Senators’ Additional Comments Recommendation 7
The first statutory review of the SPF consider:
– the need for a private right of action under the SPF, noting that the SPF already provides for
dispute resolution through IDR, EDR and regulator enforcement action;
– whether SPF Principles should remain civil penalty provisions, once industry codes are
operational;
– whether the currently complex redress framework should be streamlined and focused on
efficient IDR and EDR;
– whether the proposed EDR framework is fit for purpose and ensuring timely access to
compensation where entities have not complied with SPF obligations;
– the effectiveness of AFCA as the sole prescribed EDR scheme;
– harmonisation of concurrent obligations and broadening the safe harbour provision, in
recognition of major concurrent reforms to the AML/CTF regime, Privacy Act and Chapter 7
of the Corporations Act;
– the adverse impacts for consumers and small businesses arising from compliance with the
‘disrupt’ SPF principle;
– the proportionality of the compliance burden for smaller regulated entities and how the SPF
can be simplified; and
– the effectiveness of emerging international models for scams prevention and how the SPF
can be better aligned with frameworks in jurisdictions like the UK and Singapore.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The statutory review of the SPF is broadly worded and will enable a review to be conducted in
relation to the operation of all SPF provisions.3
Coalition Senators’ Additional Comments Recommendation 10
The government provide adequate transition timeframes when designating sectors and creating
new obligations through SPF Codes and ensure codes for all sectors are developed and come into
effect concurrently.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
Initial Treasury consultation on sector designations, codes and rules was held from
28 November 2025 to 5 January 2026
3 Scams Prevention Framework Act 2025, s 58GF
Response to the recommendations | 3
Coalition Senators’ Additional Comments Recommendation 11
The government support uptake of new, more secure technologies like the Consumer Data Right
and the NPP as part of its scams prevention strategy.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government continues to support the uptake of new, more secure technologies as part of its
broader scams prevention strategy, and welcomes the industry-wide roll-out of Confirmation of
Payee across the banking sector announced in July 2025.
Coalition Senators’ Additional Comments Recommendation 12
The government properly consult on all future SPF delegated legislation and avoid the truncated,
rushed approach to consultation conducted for the exposure draft of this Bill.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
Initial Treasury consultation on sector designations, codes and rules was held from
28 November 2025 to 5 January 2026.
Further consultation on codes and rules will occur in 2026.
Coalition Senators’ Additional Comments Recommendation 13
That the government provide a clear roadmap for the inclusion of other regulated sectors, including
payments providers and digital assets businesses.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government will continue to work constructively with relevant sectors ahead of potential
designations and consult on proposed instruments.
The Government established the Regulatory Initiatives Grid (RIG), which lists announced and
publicised reform priorities and initiatives that will materially affect the financial sector over the
next 2 years. The RIG will be updated and published twice a year (March and September).
4 | Response to the recommendations
Coalition Senators’ Additional Comments Recommendation 14
That the government urgently progress new licensing frameworks for digital asset platforms and
payment service providers, recognising these businesses as part of the scams ecosystem and
enabling their integration into the SPF.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government has introduced legislation to appropriately regulate digital asset platforms, and
has released an Exposure Draft of legislation to modernise the licensing framework for payment
service providers.
Greens Senators’ Additional Comments Recommendation 2
The Australian Government urgently act to bring digital platforms under Australian jurisdiction and
ensure jurisdiction is not an impediment to enforcement measures in the bill.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
Any business operating in Australia is required to comply with Australian laws.
Senator Pocock’s Additional Comments Recommendation 9
The government should revisit the dispute resolution mechanisms envisaged in the legislation to
simplify the process for consumers and clarify obligations for regulated entities. The Government
also needs to further increase resources to AFCA (over and above the grant already provided) and
other regulators to ensure they are adequately resourced to deal with the new functions provided
for in this legislation.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The SPF enables sector codes and rules to set out specific obligations around internal dispute
resolution (IDR) and EDR.4 The amended EM notes that it is expected that the sector codes will set
out timeframes for responding to a complaint at IDR, and guidelines in SPF rules will set out about
processes for how regulated entities should interact with other regulated entities during IDR
processes.5 The SPF rules may also set out guidelines on how to apportion liability between multiple
entities at IDR.6
The Government has provided AFCA with seed funding to expand its jurisdiction to handle scam
complaints in relation to the first three designated sectors under the SPF. AFCA will recover
additional and ongoing costs from its members per its existing practices. Further, the Government
provided 37.3 million over four years from 2024-25 (and $8.6 million per year ongoing) for the
ACCC, ASIC and ACMA to administer and enforce the SPF in the 2024-25 Budget.
4 Scams Prevention Framework Act 2025, s 58BZE; Scams Prevention Framework Act 2025, s 58BZH
5 Explanatory Memorandum, Scams Prevention Framework Act 2025, paragraph 1.297
Response to the recommendations | 5
Senator Pocock’s Additional Comments Recommendation 10
The Government should move to designate the superannuation industry as soon as practicable.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government may consider opportunities to designate additional sectors in the future, subject
to consultation with industry and any future decisions of government.
6 Scams Prevention Framework Act 2025, s 58BZE
6 | Response to the recommendations
