Australian Government response to the Senate
Environment and Communications Legislation
Committee report:
Safeguard Mechanism (Crediting) Amendment Bill 2022
[Provisions]
May 2026
Introduction
The Government welcomes the opportunity to respond to the Senate Environment and
Communications Legislation Committee’s (the Committee) report on the Safeguard Mechanism
(Crediting) Amendment Bill 2022 (the Bill).
The Safeguard Mechanism, introduced in 2016, is the Australian Government’s policy for
reducing emissions at Australia’s largest industrial facilities. Under the Safeguard Mechanism,
emissions baselines are set for ‘designated large facilities’ (facilities) that emit more than
100,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (t CO -e) per annum, which limit the net emissions
of covered facilities. This limit applies to scope 1 emissions (direct emissions). Grid-connected
₂
electricity generators are covered by a sectoral baseline set at 198 million tonnes carbon
dioxide equivalent (Mt CO -e). The Safeguard Mechanism is administered by the Clean Energy
Regulator (CER).
₂
The reforms to the Safeguard Mechanism apply a decline rate to Safeguard facilities’ baselines
so that they reduce predictably and gradually on a trajectory consistent with achieving
Australia’s emission reduction targets of 43 per cent below 2005 levels by 2030 and net zero by
2050 and will help ensure they remain competitive as the world decarbonises.
The reforms were implemented through changes to the legislation underpinning the Safeguard
Mechanism; namely, the National Greenhouse and Energy Reporting Act 2007 (NGER Act) and
the National Greenhouse and Energy Reporting (Safeguard Mechanism) Rule 2015 (the
Safeguard Rules). The Bill amended the NGER Act to give effect to key elements of the
reforms, such as introducing SMCs to the scheme to provide an incentive to facilities to reduce
their emissions below their baselines. The Bill also provided for the Safeguard Rules to detail
the crediting framework such as application processes, the number of Safeguard Mechanism
Credits (SMCs) to issue, how that number is calculated, conditions that may be imposed, and
audit requirements.
As part of the 2023 reforms, the Government committed to review the Safeguard Mechanism in
2026-27 to ensure the scheme’s design is appropriately calibrated and effectively delivering
emissions reductions in line with Australia’s targets. The review will ensure the Safeguard
Mechanism can deliver its legislated emissions targets for 2030 and establish post-2030 policy
settings reflecting the role the scheme will play in achieving the 2035 targets. Post-2030
settings will provide long term certainty to businesses, investors and our international partners,
and ensure they are credible and delivering emissions reductions in line with our 2035 target.
The review will be informed by two years of post-reform data and advice from the Climate
Change Authority (CCA).
The matters to be considered as part of the review were largely set during the 2023 reforms1,
and confirmed in the Net Zero Plan2, including:
• the baseline decline rate for 2031-35,
• the extent to which on-site abatement is being driven by the scheme, including the
treatment of SMCs and offsets beyond 2030,
• coverage arrangements, taking into account any competitive issues, abatement
potential and regulatory compliance,
1 A list of matters to be considered by the 2026-27 Review into the Safeguard Mechanism was published
at Attachment B to the Explanatory Statement to the National Greenhouse and Energy Reporting
(Safeguard Mechanism) Amendment (Reforms) Rules 2023, available on the Federal Register of
Legislation at www.legislation.gov.au/F2023L00528/latest/downloads
2 Available on the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water’s website at
www.dcceew.gov.au/climate-change/publications/net-zero-plan
2
• the suitability of arrangements for emissions-intensive, trade exposed facilities, and
• further consideration of findings of the Carbon Leakage Review and whether to
implement a border carbon adjustment.
This response provides details on the final design of the Safeguard Mechanism and the work
undertaken to implement the reforms. The Government appreciates the work of the Committee
and would like to thank all those who contributed to the Inquiry into the Bill.
Response to the Committee recommendations
Recommendation 1
2.130 The committee recommends that the Government and Clean Energy Regulator
prioritise the implementation of the Chubb Review, including in relation to landfill gas,
human induced regeneration methods and avoided deforestation.
Response
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Chubb Review refers to the 2022 Independent Review of the Australian Carbon Credit Unit
Scheme led by former Chief Scientist Professor Ian Chubb AC. The Chubb Review found the
Scheme is sound, and made recommendations for its continued improvement to support the
ongoing integrity of the Scheme. The Government accepted in principle all 16 recommendations
of the Review in its response to the Chubb Review in January 20233. Implementation of reforms
to the Scheme is well progressed.
The Department published an initial Implementation Plan for the reforms in June 2023. The
Department subsequently published a Progress Report for reforming the Australian Carbon
Credit Unit (ACCU) Scheme in February 2026, which outlines the progress to implement the
reforms since 2023 as well as work underway to address remaining priority reforms.
The Government revoked the Avoided Deforestation method on 14 February 2023.
In March 2023 the Carbon Credits (Carbon Farming Initiative) Act 2011 (CFI Act) was amended
to enable additional project information such as carbon estimation areas (CEAs) to be published
and ensure the Minister can only make or vary methods if they meet the Offset Integrity
Standards.
On 3 May 2023, the Minster for Climate Change and Energy issued a direction to the Clean
Energy Regulator (the CER) under the Clean Energy Regulator Act 2011 to ensure the
transparency and integrity of the Human Induced Regeneration (HIR) method and the projects
under it. This required the CER to administer HIR projects consistently with Recommendation 8
of the Chubb Review, to publish HIR project information, and give priority to additional
compliance audits of HIR projects using independent expert auditors.
Following the Minister’s direction, the CER published guidance in setting out the evidence the
CER will require about the activities undertaken in the HIR baseline period i.e., the suppressors
(grazing animals, weeds or mechanical or chemical destruction that have prevented trees from
regenerating); and activities undertaken in the project period (the removal of suppressors), to
register and credit projects.
All HIR projects must undergo regeneration and forest cover attainment ‘gateway checks’ at 5-
yearly intervals to demonstrate only land progressing towards forest cover is being issued
3 Available on the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water’s website at
www.dcceew.gov.au/about/reporting/obligations/government-responses/independent-review-accus
3
ACCUs. The CER published guidance in August 2023 which outlined its approach to require all
HIR projects submitting offsets reports as part of these gateway checks to be audited under
section 215 of the CFI Act at this time. The CER updated this guidance in September 2025 to
implement a revised risk-based approach to these audits consistent with the Minister’s
directions. Gateway checks will be assessed against risk-based criteria to determine whether a
gateway audit is required.
The Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water (the Department)
released a discussion paper on the next set of priority reforms to implement the Chubb Review
recommendations for public consultation from August 2023 to October 2023. Feedback from
consultation has been informing policy development, including legislative amendments to
implement the relevant recommendations.
As part of this work, in May 2024 the Carbon Credits (Carbon Farming Initiative) Rule 2015 (CFI
Rule) was amended to allow the Emissions Reduction Assurance Committee (ERAC) to
consider proposals from proponents for new or varied methods. The first Expression of Interest
Round for new method proposals ran from May to July 2024. In October 2024, the Assistant
Minister for Climate Change and Energy announced 4 proposals to be prioritised for
development into new methods
In December 2024, further amendments to the CFI Rule were made to increase the amount of
project information that could be published, including suppression mechanisms for HIR projects.
The CER began publishing this new information on the ACCU Scheme project register in May
2025. The CER has also been making continual improvements to its website and data
publication processes to improve the accessibility and transparency of scheme and project
information.
The Department established a landfill gas technical working group to advise on technological,
scientific, economic, and regulatory conditions for landfill gas projects in 2023. In May 2024, the
Department consulted publicly on options for reforming the landfill gas methods. Public
consultation on a draft method occurred between May and June 2025. The new Reducing
Methane Emissions from Landfill Gas method, which incorporates recommendations for upward
sloping baselines from the Chubb Review, was made in November 2025, following ERAC’s
advice that it complies with the Offsets Integrity Standards.
Work is underway to implement more integrity reforms, in line with the recommendations of the
Chubb Review. A number of these reforms require amendments to the CFI Act which will further
improve governance and integrity in the Scheme. The Department is working towards introducing
these amendments in 2026.
To support increased abatement, a comprehensive work program to develop new high-integrity
methods is also underway, as well as provision of support to new participants entering the
Scheme. The government is committed to continuously improving the scheme beyond the current
reforms, to ensure ongoing integrity and alignment with evolving best practice.
4
Recommendation 2
2.135 The committee recommends that the bill be amended to require the publication of
carbon estimation areas of eligible offsets projects as recommended by the Chubb
Review.
Response
The Government accepts this recommendation.
Legislative amendments to the CFI Act were passed to require the CER to publish the CEAs
from projects on the publicly available ACCU scheme project register (also known as the ERF
Project Register). In June 2023, the CER commenced publishing CEA data for ACCU Scheme
projects on the ACCU scheme project register. As of 31 January 2026, CEAs for 528 projects
have been published. The CER has also published additional contextual information relevant to
CEAs that was voluntarily provided by project proponents.
Recommendation 3
2.146 The committee recommends that the review into carbon leakage incorporates
consideration of how a carbon border adjustment mechanism could complement reform of
the Safeguard Mechanism.
Response
The Government accepts this recommendation.
Following stakeholder feedback during consultation on the Safeguard Mechanism reforms, the
Government committed to undertaking a Carbon Leakage Review.
The Review was led by Professor Frank Jotzo and was undertaken between July 2023 and
March 2025. The Review assessed carbon leakage risks and policy options to address these
risks, including a potential Australian carbon border adjustment mechanism, particularly in
relation to steel and cement. The Review included public consultation and engagement with key
stakeholders, including industry, experts and researchers, federal and state government
agencies, trading partners, relevant international bodies and the broader community. The final
report of the Review was released on 14 February 20264.
The Net Zero Plan highlighted the importance of addressing the risks of carbon leakage to
ensure a level playing field for Australian industries. In accordance with the commitment in the
Net Zero Plan, the Government will further consider these issues and whether to implement a
border carbon adjustment in the 2026-27 review of the Safeguard Mechanism.
Recommendation 4
3.52 The committee recommends that the Australian Government continues to monitor the
impact of new entrants on the delivery of the Safeguard Mechanism’s share of Australia’s
emissions reduction targets, and reports to Parliament on progress through the Annual
Climate Change Statement.
Response
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Safeguard reforms require large industrial facilities, including new entrants, to deliver a
proportional share of Australia’s 2030 climate target to reduce emissions to 43 per cent below
4 Available on the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water’s website at
www.dcceew.gov.au/climate-change/publications/carbon-leakage-review
5
2005 levels by 2030. The reformed scheme requires Safeguard facilities to reduce their
emissions gradually and predictably. In general, baselines decline by 4.9 per cent each year to
2030 for both new and existing facilities. The decline rate includes explicit consideration of
emissions from expected new developments and a ‘reserve’ to account for higher-than-
expected production from both new and existing facilities.
As a result of Government amendments to the Bill in the Senate, the following targets and
outcomes were legislated in the objects of the NGER Act (subsection 3(2)) to provide assurance
that the Safeguard Mechanism will achieve the required emissions reductions:
• Net emissions from all Safeguard facilities do not exceed 100 Mt CO -e in 2029-30 and zero
from 2049-50, and 1,233 Mt CO -e in total over the decade from 1 July 2020 to 30 June
₂
2030.
₂
• Total gross emissions from Safeguard facilities reduce over time, measured through a
rolling 5-year average.
• Safeguard facilities have a material incentive to invest in reducing covered emissions.
• The competitiveness of trade-exposed industries is appropriately supported as Australia
and its regions seize the opportunities of the move to a global net zero economy.
When the Climate Change Minister makes or amends the Safeguard Rules, they must be
satisfied that those rules are consistent with these emissions targets, as well as other objects of
the Act and publish their reasons for being satisfied. The Climate Change Minister is further
required to act, such as by amending the Safeguard Rules or taking other policy actions, if
emissions are expected to breach the emissions targets set in the objects of the NGER Act.
The Bill was also amended in the Senate to include requirements under the Climate Change Act
2022 (Climate Change Act) that the Environment Minister must give any emission information
provided in the course of assessment to the Climate Change Minister relating to the scope 1
emissions from approvals under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act
1999 (the EPBC Act) of new projects that are expected to enter the Safeguard Mechanism or
expanding projects that will increase the direct emissions of a facility already covered by the
Safeguard Mechanism. The Environment Minister must also give this information to the CCA
and the Secretary of the Climate Change Department.
As part of CCA’s advice to the Minister’s annual climate change statement to Parliament, the
CCA provides advice on progress against the emissions reduction goals, with specific reference
to new entrants or expanding projects, and will advise on whether amendments to the
Safeguard Rules are necessary to address this. The CCA’s 2024 and 2025 annual progress
reports both found that the scheme is effectively delivery emissions reduction and is on track to
meet its legislated targets.
Recommendation 5
3.97 The committee recommends that the Senate pass the bill.
Response
The Government agrees with this recommendation and notes that the recommendation was
directed to the Senate.
The Bill passed both houses on 30 March 2023 following 6 amendments in the House of
Representatives and 16 amendments in the Senate.
6
Dissenting report: Coalition
Recommendation 1
1.40 The Coalition recommends that the bill be opposed.
Response
The Government does not agree with this recommendation and notes that the
recommendation was directed to the Senate.
7
Dissenting report: Australian Greens
Recommendation 1
1.30 That the Government should design a scheme that makes pollution from coal and
gas go down, not up.
Response
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
Under the reformed Safeguard Mechanism, net emissions covered by the scheme will fall from
an estimated 143 Mt CO -e in 2022-23 to no more than 100 Mt CO -e in 2030 and will not
exceed 1,233 Mt CO -e in total over the decade from 1 July 2020 to 30 June 2030.
₂ ₂
This will see Safegua₂rd facilities, including those in the mining, oil and gas sectors, deliver more
than 200 million tonnes of abatement over the period to 2030 compared to pre-reform business
as usual projected emissions.
The objects of the NGER Act have been amended to include ensuring aggregate net and gross
emissions of Safeguard covered facilities decline. New subsection 22XS(1A) was also inserted
into the NGER Act, requiring the Minister to only make Safeguard Rules that are consistent with
the objects of the NGER Act. The combination of these provisions helps ensure that the
objectives of the reformed Safeguard Mechanism will be achieved.
Australia’s emissions projections 2025 show that gross emissions from the coal and gas sectors
are projected to decline over time under the baseline scenario, which incorporates the impacts
of the Safeguard Mechanism reforms (see Table 1).
Table 1: Emission projections for the coal and gas sectors, baseline scenario, Mt CO -e
2
Economic sector 2005 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040
Coal Mining 36 42 37 37 29 27
Oil and gas extraction 15 51 46 40 38 28
Source: DCCEEW (2025) Australia’s emissions projections 2025, Table 34
Recommendation 2
1.31 The Bill be amended to prevent any new coal, oil or gas project from proceeding in
Australian lands or waters.
Response
The Government does not agree with this recommendation.
Gas will play an important role in Australia’s transition to net zero greenhouse gas emissions –
including by supporting secure and reliable electricity supply as we accelerate investment in
renewables and as coal-fired generation leaves the system. Gas is an important energy source
in the industrial sector for processes requiring high temperature heat and as a feedstock where
there are not readily available alternatives. Australian gas will also play a role in supporting
regional stability, energy security and our international partners’ plans to reduce their
emissions footprint. The Australian Government has developed a Future Gas Strategy to help
plan for the future and support Australia, and our region’s, transition to net zero. The strategy’s
key objectives are to: support decarbonisation of the Australian economy, promote Australia's
energy security and affordability, enhance Australia’s reputation as an attractive trade and
investment destination, help our trade partners on their own paths to net zero. The Australian
Government’s Net Zero Plan notes that the role of gas will shift towards higher-value and non-
substitutable uses over time, with emissions declining substantially to 2050. The Plan also
8
identifies that gas is an immediate option to reduce emissions from sectors that traditionally rely
on coal, like iron and steelmaking, until lower carbon fuels become available. The Electricity and
Energy Sector Plan further notes that a secure and affordable supply of natural gas is key to an
orderly transition.
The Safeguard Mechanism reforms provide a policy framework for industry to reduce emissions
efficiently while contributing to Australia’s emissions reduction targets.
Under the reformed scheme, new facilities are given declining baselines set at international best
practice levels, adapted for an Australian context. This recognises that new facilities have the
opportunity to use the latest technology and build world’s best practice emissions performance
into their design. It sends a strong signal to investors that Australia is serious about net zero
emissions.
New gas fields supplying liquefied natural gas facilities have a zero baseline allocation for
reservoir carbon dioxide regardless of whether they are defined as backfills to an existing facility
or separate new facilities.
A project extracting or exploring a shale gas formation, which is covered by the Safeguard
Mechanism, is required to have net-zero scope 1 emissions from the project onset. This
includes projects within the Beetaloo Basin, consistent with the Australian Government’s
commitments to work with the Northern Territory to support its implementation of
recommendation 9.8 of the Scientific Inquiry into Hydraulic Fracturing in the Northern Territory.
The Bill was also amended in the Senate to include requirements under the Climate Change Act
that the Environment Minister must give any emission information provided in the course of
assessment to the Climate Change Minister relating to the scope 1 emissions from approvals
under the EPBC Act of new projects that are expected to enter the Safeguard Mechanism or
expanding projects that will increase the direct emissions of a facility already covered by the
Safeguard Mechanism. The Environment Minister must also give this information to the CCA
and the Secretary of the Climate Change Department.
As part of CCA’s advice to the Minister’s annual climate change statement to Parliament, the
CCA provides advice on progress against the emissions reduction goals, with specific reference
to new entrants or expanding projects, and will advise on whether amendments to the
Safeguard Rules are necessary to address this. The CCA’s 2024 and 2025 annual progress
reports both found that the scheme is effectively delivering emissions reduction and is on track
to meet its legislated targets.
The Climate Change Minister is required to act, such as by amending the Safeguard Rules or
taking other policy actions, if emissions from new projects are expected to breach the scheme’s
emissions targets.
Recommendation 3
1.34 Given the substantial, ongoing integrity concerns with ACCUs generated from
existing projects and methodologies, the Government should take immediate action to
ensure all credits, including existing credits have integrity.
Response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government is confident that ACCUs issued under the scheme deliver real, additional and
permanent abatement. ACCUs support important projects in regional Australia, delivering
employment, biodiversity and agriculture co-benefits alongside emissions reductions.
The Chubb Review found that the ACCU Scheme arrangements are sound and provided
several recommendations for its continued improvement. The Government has agreed in
9
principle to all recommendations of the Chubb Review to strengthen the ACCU Scheme and
ensure its ongoing integrity. Implementation of reforms to the Scheme is significantly
progressed.
Other recent reviews by the CCA in 2023 and the Australian National Audit Office in 2024 have
found the Scheme is well designed, well administered, and contributing to Australia’s transition
to net zero.
The CER briefed the Independent Review Panel on its compliance tools, powers and
processes, including extensive up-front checks for Scheme participants and projects prior to
registration. The Panel was satisfied that the CER has the powers to address project
noncompliance. The CER undertakes comprehensive assurance, assessment and compliance
checks before issuing ACCUs to any project. The CER can withhold or require relinquishment of
credits, require remedial action or revoke projects on a case-by-case basis. ACCU issuance can
be adjusted to address any concerns about over-crediting.
In response to the Chubb Review, the CER has introduced further enhancements to its
compliance and assurance approach. On 18 August 2023, the CER released guidance on HIR
gateway audit requirements under section 215 of the Carbon Credits (Carbon Farming Initiative)
Act 2011 which outlined its approach to require all HIR projects submitting offsets reports as
part of these gateway checks to be audited at that time. The CER updated this guidance in
September 2025 to implement a revised risk-based approach to these audits.
The CER has also engaged independent ecologist Associate Professor (Honorary) Cris Brack
from the Australian National University to provide additional independent assurance of the
performance of HIR projects. Four reports have been published since December 2023. The full
reports are available on the CER’s website. The reports have consistently found:
- HIR projects are demonstrating regeneration and appropriate project activity management
actions have been implemented.
- Proponents are using appropriate systems and tools to ensure CEAs only contain eligible
land, and any land that is not progressing towards forest cover is removed.
- Independent audit reports and the CER’s assessments of HIR projects provide strong
assurance that projects are being managed in accordance with method requirements
- No single national-scale model is well suited to making estimates of canopy cover or cover
change for these projects.
- An increased focus on objectively located, field-based measurements and georeferenced
photographs is required until national-scale models of tree cover become more reliable for
large HIR projects.
The government is committed to continuously improving the scheme to ensure ongoing integrity
and alignment with evolving best practice.
Recommendation 4
1.37 The Committee recommends that the Senate reject the Government’s claims of
public interest immunity and insist on the production of the assumptions behind the use of
offsets and on-site abatement.
Response
The Government does not agree with this recommendation and notes that the
recommendation was directed to the Senate.
Disclosure of the assumptions behind the Safeguard Mechanism analysis would not be in the
public interest because disclosure would reveal the deliberations of Cabinet. It is a long held
10
and accepted principle that deliberations of Cabinet be appropriately protected in order to
ensure that decisions can be discussed in an open manner preserving Cabinet unity.
Recommendation 5
1.40 The committee recommends that the Senate compel the production of the carbon
estimation areas materials from both the Clean Energy Regulator before the final two
sitting weeks of March 2023.
Response
The Government notes this recommendation. The CER now publishes CEA data for relevant
area-based projects on the Project Register under the ACCU Scheme.
Recommendation 6
1.41 That recommendations 1 through to 4 of the majority report be implemented by the
Government.
Response
The Government accepts this recommendation.
Recommendation 7
1.42 Given the danger that new coal and gas projects pose to a stable climate and a safe
society, this bill and legislative instruments should not pass in their current form.
Response
The Government does not agree with this recommendation, but notes that the Bill was
amended and passed with the support of the Australian Greens since the Committee’s report
was published.
11
Additional comments: Senator David Pocock
Recommendation 1
1.22 Amend the objects of the National Greenhouse and Energy Reporting Act 2007
(NGER Act) to set out key objectives of the Safeguard Mechanism, including:
• that the industrial sector makes a requisite proportional contribution to meeting
Australia’s overall emissions reduction targets; and
• that aggregate net covered emissions from the operation of designated large
facilities decline in line with the provisions of the Climate Change Act 2022.
1.23 In line with this, the NGER Act should be amended to require that the Minister must
be satisfied that the Safeguard Rules are consistent with those objectives when making or
amending the Safeguard Rules.
Response
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Safeguard Mechanism reforms require large industrial facilities to deliver a proportional
share of Australia’s 2030 climate target.
Government amendments increased the transparency, accountability and integrity of the
Safeguard Mechanism. They included an amendment to the second object of the NGER Act to
ensure that key outcomes of the reformed Safeguard Mechanism are achieved. This clarifies
that the intent of the reforms is to drive down emissions from the largest emitters in Australia’s
industrial sector. Section 3(2) of the NGER Act includes these objectives of the Safeguard
Mechanism:
• In aggregate, net emissions from Safeguard facilities do not exceed 100 Mt CO -e by
2029-30 and zero by 2050, and 1,233 Mt CO -e in total over the decade to 2030. This
₂
represents a proportional share of emissions in line with the national targets.
₂
• Total gross emissions from Safeguard facilities reduce over time, measured through a
rolling 5-year average.
• Safeguard facilities have a material incentive to invest in reducing covered emissions.
• The competitiveness of trade-exposed industries is appropriately supported as Australia
and its regions seize the opportunities of the move to a global net zero economy.
Subsection 22XS(1A) was also inserted into the NGER Act, requiring the Climate Change
Minister to only make Safeguard Rules that are consistent with the objects of the NGER Act.
The combination of these provisions helps ensure that aggregate net covered emissions from
the operation of Safeguard Facilities decline and the objectives of the reforms are achieved.
Recommendation 2
1.24 Put a carbon budget of 1,233 million tonnes CO -e emissions between 2021 and
2030 in legislation or regulation as an absolute cap on scheme emissions.
₂
Response
The Government partially agrees with recommendation 2.
The Government agrees to implementing a carbon budget for the Safeguard Mechanism for the
period until 2030. Government amendments to the objects to the NGER Act included the
12
outcome of ensuring that net Safeguard emissions do not exceed a carbon budget of 1,233 Mt
CO -e in total over the decade to 30 June 2030.
The ₂ Government does not agree that the carbon budget should be a cap on absolute
emissions. However, the updated objects of the NGER Act include that the total gross
emissions covered by the Safeguard Mechanism should decline over time, measured through a
5-year rolling average.
Assessing the carbon budget on a net emissions basis enables access to flexible compliance
mechanisms, including surrendering ACCUs or SMCs. This is important to the success of the
reforms to the Safeguard Mechanism because it helps businesses find the lowest cost
abatement, wherever it occurs, without directly affecting the total net safeguard emissions.
Many Safeguard facilities are in sectors where technologies haven’t yet been demonstrated or
aren’t yet commercially available. Surrender of SMCs or ACCUs for Safeguard compliance
provide an essential way for these facilities to contribute to Australia’s climate targets while low
emissions technologies are further developed. Importantly, these options will result in the same
emissions reductions being delivered.
Recommendation 3
1.27 Require the Clean Energy Regulator to report annually on the size and use of the
Safeguard Mechanism budget and reserve, including the drawdown of the reserve by
category (new entrants, expanded production, and unacquitted exceedance of baselines).
Response
The Government agrees in part to the recommendation.
Government amendments to the Bill introduced in the Senate add further transparency to the
operation of the Safeguard Mechanism by requiring the CER to publish more information.
Safeguard facility emissions data is published annually by the CER, including data on excess
emissions situations. Subsection 24(3A) of the NGER Act requires the CER to publish, by
15 April after each financial year, the following information for each designated large facility:
• the facility’s total covered emissions for that facility for that financial year
• the amount of covered emissions that were carbon dioxide, methane, or nitrous oxide
• the facility’s baseline emissions number.
In addition, the CER is required to publish for each financial year between 1 July 2023 and
30 June 2030, the following aggregate information:
• safeguard emissions for the financial year;
• net safeguard emissions for the financial year;
• the 5-year rolling average safeguard emissions for the financial year; and
• the total safeguard emissions for all of the financial years between 1 July 2020 and the
end of the financial year.
The CER published Safeguard data5 for the first compliance period post the commencement of
the Safeguard reforms on 15 April 2025. The CER published Safeguard data for the 2024-25
compliance period on 15 April 2026.
5 Available at the Clean Energy Regulator’s website at www.cer.gov.au/markets/reports-and-
data/safeguard-data/2023-24-safeguard-data-highlights
13
Recommendation 4
1.31 New entrants must have a net zero impact on emissions and no access to Australian
Carbon Credit Units (ACCUs) to comply with baselines.
Response
The Government does not agree with this recommendation.
Under the reformed Safeguard Mechanism, new facilities are given baselines set at
international best practice levels, adapted for an Australian context. These will decline over time
at the same rate as other facilities. This recognises that new facilities have the opportunity to
use the latest technology and build world’s best practice emissions performance into their
design. It sends a strong signal to investors that Australia is serious about net zero emissions.
Australia’s transformation into a renewable energy superpower will be essential to reaching net
zero and to our future prosperity and is creating unprecedented demand for critical minerals and
cheap, clean renewables, which are unlocking opportunities across sectors. New entrants will
be needed for ensuring Australia can be internationally competitive in new industries, such as
green metals, critical minerals processing, and a domestic hydrogen industry.
Many Safeguard facilities are in sectors where low emissions technologies are not yet
demonstrated or commercially available. Enabling the surrender of SMCs and ACCUs towards
Safeguard compliance provides a way for these facilities to contribute to Australia’s climate
targets while low emissions technologies are further developed. Use of SMCs and ACCUs
allows new facilities to meet their obligations in a cost-effective way, supporting business in the
transition to net zero emissions.
The 2026-27 review of the Safeguard Mechanism will consider the use of SMCs and offsets
beyond 2030, noting these credits provide a significant incentive for investment in onsite
abatement.
Recommendation 5
1.35 Clarify that any facility expansion or extension that will be responsible for over
100,000 tonnes of CO -e a year is classified as a new entrant.
₂
Response
The Government does not agree to this recommendation.
An expansion or extension at an existing facility does not automatically result in a baseline
change for the facility unless the facility begins producing a new product. Consistent with the
rules that new facilities are given baselines set at international best practice levels, international
best practice also apply at existing Safeguard facilities if they begin producing new products.
The reforms retain the existing production-adjusted baseline setting framework for both existing
and new facilities, so baselines grow and fall with production. With the reforms applying an
annual decline rate and enabling below baseline crediting, facilities are incentivised to reduce
the emissions intensity of their products.
Under the reformed scheme, new gas fields supplying liquefied natural gas facilities have a zero
baseline allocation for reservoir carbon dioxide regardless of whether they are defined as
backfills to an existing facility or separate new facilities.
The Environment Minister must give any emission information provided in the course of
assessment to the Climate Change Minister relating to the scope 1 emissions from approvals
under the EPBC Act of new projects that are expected to enter the Safeguard Mechanism or
expanding projects that will increase the direct emissions of a facility already covered by the
14
Safeguard Mechanism. The Environment Minister must also give this information to the CCA
and the Secretary of the Climate Change Department.
The Climate Change Minister will be required to act, such as by amending the Safeguard Rules
or taking other policy actions, if emissions from new or expanded projects are expected to
breach the scheme’s emissions targets.
Recommendation 6
1.45 Legislate a declining limit on the use of ACCUs by Safeguard Mechanism facilities,
reducing to 20 per cent of exceedance above baselines by 2030. If the Government is
unwilling to implement a hard cap, there should be a discount on the carbon value of
ACCUs over thresholds, with the discount on carbon value escalating in proportion to the
use of ACCUs on a sliding scale.
Recommendation 7
1.53 Ensure that SMCs are used by Safeguard Mechanism facilities to meet compliance
requirements in preference to ACCUs.
Response
The Government does not agree with recommendations 6 and 7.
The reformed scheme includes measures to ensure on-site abatement is incentivised without
limiting the use of ACCUs, namely the introduction of crediting, which provides a material
incentive for facilities below their baseline to reduce emissions by issuing them with SMCs
which can be either sold or banked for future use.
Under the reformed scheme, any facility surrendering ACCUs equal to or more than 30 per cent
of their baseline is required to explain to the CER why they have not reduced emissions more
on-site. To provide increased transparency and accountability non-commercially sensitive
aspects of an explanation will be published to allow scrutiny from investors and the public. For
the 2023-24 compliance period, statements for 18 facilities were published.
The 2026-27 review of the Safeguard Mechanism will consider the use of SMCs and offsets
beyond 2030, noting these credits provide a significant incentive for investment in onsite
abatement. The review will be informed by advice from the CCA on the extent to which on-site
abatement is being driven by the reforms, and whether any additional incentives are required.
This could include a discount on ACCUs when used for more than a certain percentage of a
baseline, or any circumstances where limits on the use of ACCUs may be appropriate.
An ACCU represents one tonne of emissions avoided or sequestered. The CFI Act includes a
robust legislative framework to ensure the integrity of ACCUs, such as the legislated Offsets
Integrity Standards which all ACCU Scheme methods must comply with. The government is
confident that ACCUs issued under the Scheme deliver real, additional abatement, supported
by the findings of the Chubb Review which found the Scheme to be sound, while recommending
several measures to strengthen the scheme and ensure its ongoing integrity. The Government
has accepted in principle all 16 recommendations of the Chubb Review. Significant progress
has already been made to implement reforms to the ACCU Scheme, and work is currently
underway to further bolster governance and integrity of the Scheme.
Access to flexible compliance mechanisms, including surrendering ACCUs or SMCs, is
important to the success of the reforms to the Safeguard Mechanism because it helps
businesses find the lowest cost abatement, wherever it occurs, without directly affecting the
total net safeguard emissions. Many Safeguard facilities are in sectors where technologies
15
haven’t yet been demonstrated or aren’t yet commercially available. Surrender of SMCs or
ACCUs for Safeguard compliance provide an essential way for these facilities to contribute to
Australia’s climate targets while low emissions technologies are further developed. Importantly,
these options will result in the same emissions reductions being delivered.
Recommendation 8
1.62 Remove the cost containment mechanism. If the government considers the
mechanism necessary, it should be implemented as a penalty price, with any revenue
directed into the Powering the Regions Fund. The mechanism should be subject to a
three-year sunset period.
Response
The Government does not agree with this recommendation.
The cost containment mechanism was a response to feedback received from businesses, which
called for such a measure to be included within the reformed scheme. It helps businesses to
manage risks relating to carbon unit prices, liquidity in carbon unit markets, and the potentially
high cost of on-site abatement at some facilities.
This measure is intended to prevent excessive prices and to provide certainty to facilities on the
maximum compliance costs they would face. The fixed price of $75 in 2023-24, increasing with
CPI plus 2 per cent each year, is set at a level to avoid disincentivising on-site abatement. The
2025-26 price is $82.68.
This measure is only available for Safeguard facilities, and only where they have exceeded their
baseline. The ACCUs available for use in this measure will be sourced from ACCUs that are
delivered to Government from 12 January 2023 onwards under Carbon Abatement Contracts.
Any funds received from this measure (and any penalties paid for non-compliance, noting no
penalties are expected based on a strong culture of compliance) will be allocated to the
Powering the Regions Fund, to support additional abatement to meet Australia’s targets.
The sufficiency of the cost containment measure will be considered as part the 2026-2027
review of the Safeguard Mechanism.
Recommendation 9
1.77 Prevent Safeguard Mechanism facilities from surrendering ACCUs unless there is a
high degree of certainty that the abatement that they offer is real, additional and
permanent. This starts with full implementation of the Chubb Review as a matter of
urgency.
Response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government is confident that ACCUs issued under the scheme deliver real, additional and
permanent abatement.
The Chubb Review found that the ACCU Scheme arrangements are sound, whilst providing
several recommendations for its continuous improvement. The Government agreed in principle
to all recommendations of the Chubb Review, and implementation is well underway, to increase
transparency and confidence in the scheme, and to ensure the continued integrity of abatement
under the scheme.
16
Recommendation 10
1.81 Subject ACCUs, SMCs and any future use of international credits to rolling vintage
windows of 3-year timeframe.
Response
The Government does not agree with this recommendation.
A fixed time limit on banking of credits (or rolling vintage windows) may limit the supply of
credits in the longer-term, and would increase carbon market complexity as different vintages of
SMCs and ACCUs would likely trade at different prices.
As such, unlimited banking of SMCs and ACCUs is allowed under the scheme to 2030. The use
of SMCs and offsets beyond 2030, and the use of international units, will be considered as part
of the 2026-2027 review of the Safeguard Mechanism.
Recommendation 11
1.88 Require the Clean Energy Regulator to:
• Publish the details of ACCUs that are held and that have been surrendered by
each facility, including project origin on a yearly basis; and
• Publish new data on the Carbon Estimation Areas as often as practicable.
Response
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The CER is required to publish the following information reported by Safeguard Mechanism
entities after the end of each year’s compliance deadline:
• the number and type of prescribed carbon units (which include ACCUs and SMCs)
surrendered for that period
• the methodology determinations under which any surrendered ACCUs were created.
The Safeguard Mechanism (Crediting) Amendment Bill 2023 included an amendment to the CFI
Act to enable the publication of protected information such as CEAs and additional protected
information once prescribed in a rule (recommendation 4.1 of the Chubb Review). The first
publication of CEAs occurred in early June 2023, and as of 31 January 2026, CEAs for 528
projects have been published.
Recommendation 12
1.89 Amend the Carbon Credits (Carbon Farming Initiative) Act 2011 to provide for
extended standing for judicial review.
Response
The Government does not agree with this recommendation.
The CFI Act defines administrative decisions of the CER that can be reviewed. These include
refusal to register a project or refusal to issue a credit. Merits review of the decision can be
initiated by a person aggrieved by the decision of the CER. This includes the person who made
the application for the decision.
A decision of a delegate of the CER would be initially reviewed internally before it can proceed
by application to the Administrative Review Tribunal (ART) (replacing the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal as of October 2024). A decision made by the board members of the CER
would be required to proceed directly to the ART for review.
17
The Minister for Climate Change and Energy’s decisions to make, vary or revoke a method, or
the advice of the ERAC, are not subject to merits review as they are not administrative
decisions.
The methods are legislative instruments and subject to normal Parliamentary process, including
disallowance and sunsetting. While the Committee’s advice is not subject to merits review, the
process for creating the advice involves a rigorous statutory process with many integrity
elements, including public consultation.
The Committee’s final advice is published along with submissions to public consultation and a
statement of reasons by the Minister. This provides transparency of the advice and how
elements, such as the Offset Integrity Standards have been applied. Decisions made under the
amended CFI Act may also be reviewed under relevant judicial review legislation in relation to
an error of law.
Recommendation 13
1.94 Increase in the funding available through the Safeguard Transformation Stream of
the Powering the Regions Fund.
Response
The Government accepts in principle this recommendation.
Since the announcement of the $600 million available for facilities under the Safeguard
Transformation Stream on 10 January 2023, a further $800 million in support has been
announced under the Powering the Regions Fund. This is comprised of $400 million to support
safeguard mechanism facilities which provide critical inputs to clean energy industries as well as
$400 million under the Industrial Transformation Stream to support industrial decarbonisation
and new clean energy in Regional Australia.
Recommendation 14
1.104 Public funding to Safeguard Mechanism facilities should only be provided where it
will support genuine business transformation to decarbonise operations. Access to the
Safeguard Transformation Stream should be subject to the following restrictions:
• Fossil fuel producers should be denied access;
• Companies receiving funds must be prevented from using the funds to purchase
ACCUs; and
• Companies receiving funds must have a publicly available Corporate Transition
Plan and complete annual reporting on the implementation of the plan. Such plans
should include: what measures are being taken to reduce emissions, identification
of verifiable and quantifiable KPIs which track the success of transition actions,
and measures that will be taken to ensure transparency.
Response
The Government agrees in part to this recommendation.
The Safeguard Transformation Stream (STS) of the Powering the Regions Fund is focused on
decarbonisation of trade-exposed industrial facilities covered by the Safeguard Mechanism.
New or expanding coal or gas projects are ineligible for grants.
STS grants are for projects that reduce direct (scope 1) emissions on-site at eligible industrial
facilities. Grant funding will not be provided for the purpose of purchasing ACCUs. Grant
recipients are required to regularly report on the expenditure of grant funds.
18
The Government agrees that transparency is important. While the Safeguard Mechanism
reforms have not introduced a requirement for a Corporate Transition Plan, they have
introduced reporting and transparency requirements for facilities that are accessing certain
flexibility mechanisms, in addition to existing reporting requirements under the National
Greenhouse and Energy Reporting Scheme (NGER scheme). Applicants for STS grant funding
may attach their Corporate Transition Plan to support the merit assessment of their project.
Grant recipients are required to report on the emissions reductions achieved by the funded
project.
Recommendation 15
1.118 Bring methane emissions reporting and methane intensity targets into line with
international best practices.
Response
The Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
Emissions data reported under the NGER scheme are a key data source for Australia’s national
greenhouse gas inventory. As such, methane emission estimation methods under the NGER
scheme align with the internationally agreed rules and guidelines, adopted under the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and Paris Agreement, including
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) emission estimation guidelines.
NGER scheme emission estimation methods also draw on national and international standards
for direct measurement, sampling and analysis of key data inputs, as well as systems that
operate to support other regulatory functions, including Australia’s legislated national
measurement system which underpins all commercial transactions in Australia, and Australia’s
taxation system for fuel classifications.
Each year, NGER scheme methods are subject to review and improvement by the Department
based on the latest available research, data, technologies and practices, and feedback from
stakeholders and the CER (the independent Scheme administrator). This annual process is also
informed by the annual UNFCCC technical reviews of Australia’s national greenhouse gas
inventory.
Every five years, the CCA conducts a legislated review of the NGER scheme legislation. In
response to the CCA’s 2023 review, the Government amended the legislation in 2024 and 2025
to further enhance the accuracy and transparency of reported fugitive methane emissions.
These amendments include requiring all open-cut mine facilities covered by the Safeguard
Mechanism to estimate fugitive methane emissions using an NGER method equivalent to the
highest (most technically sophisticated) IPCC method tier, consistent with a prescribed
transition schedule. The Government has committed $10.2m to June 2027 to the next phase of
its response to the CCA review, which will prioritise further enhancements to fugitive methane
emission estimation. As part of that work, the Government has appointed an Expert Panel led
by Australia’s former Chief Scientist to provide advice on atmospheric approaches for
estimating fugitive methane emissions from the coal, oil and gas sectors. To inform the Panel’s
work and help all countries better understand and manage open-cut coal mine fugitive methane
emissions, the government has also commissioned a world-first study that will test the capability
of a range of top-down approaches to detect and quantify controlled methane releases over a
site designed to simulate an operational open-cut coal mine. The Government’s response6 to
6 Available on the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water’s website at
www.dcceew.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/government-response-cca-nger-review.pdf
19
the 2023 CCA review and Terms of Reference for the Expert Panel7 are available on the
Department’s website.
When setting the international best practice benchmark for the fossil fuel sectors under the
Safeguard Mechanism, the Government considered emerging international standards on
methane emissions, as well as data from Australian facilities that has exceeded those
standards. The best practice benchmarks set in the Safeguard Rule were found to be more
robust than the international standards.
Recommendation 16
1.119 Methane abatement from Safeguard-covered facilities should only be tradeable with
methane emissions of other Safeguard-covered facilities, and should be confined to the
Safeguard Mechanism Credit market, not the Australian Carbon Credit Market.
Response
The Government does not agree with this recommendation.
Implementing this recommendation would limit access least cost abatement– increasing cost for
businesses without corresponding benefit. Because of the way emissions are measured and
reported under the Safeguard Mechanism, the comparative impact of methane on the climate is
accounted for in both the measurement framework and the resulting credit market.
The Safeguard Mechanism relies on the existing reporting and measurement framework
provided for in the NGER Act. The framework uses the unit of ‘carbon dioxide equivalent’ as a
way of quantifying greenhouse gases to reflect their contribution to climate change compared to
a unit of carbon dioxide. This allows emissions to be accurately compared across sources and
types of emissions, including emissions from methane.
Safeguard Mechanism Credits can only be used for the purpose of compliance with obligations
under the Safeguard Mechanism.
Transparency is increased through subsection 24(3A) of the NGER Act which requires the CER
to publish, by 15 April after each financial year, the amount of covered emissions that were
carbon dioxide, methane, or nitrous oxide. This allows for increased scrutiny of individual
emissions profiles.
Recommendation 17
1.122 Make public:
• The modelling of ACCU usage as a proportion of total abatement under the reform
of the Safeguard Mechanism; and
• Carbon Estimation Area data.
Response
The Government agrees in part with this recommendation.
The 2025 emissions projections estimate net demand for carbon credit units, SMCs and
ACCUs, expected to be created by Safeguard facilities to meet their compliance obligations
under the scheme. The 2025 emissions projections also show an anticipated 430 million tonnes
of onsite abatement estimated to be achieved by Safeguard facilities in the period 2026 to 2040.
7 Available on the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water’s website at
www.dcceew.gov.au/climate-change/emissions-reporting/national-greenhouse-energy-reporting-
scheme/expert-panel-atmospheric-measurement-fugitive-methane-emissions-au
20
The Government agrees with publication of CEAs. The Safeguard Mechanism (Crediting)
Amendment Bill 2022 included an amendment to the CFI Act to enable the publication of
protected information such as CEAs and additional protected information once prescribed in a
rule (recommendation 4.1 of the Chubb Review). Publication began in early June 2023, and as
of 31 January 2026, CEAs for 528 projects have been published.
Additionally, the CER is required to publish the following information reported by Safeguard
Mechanism entities after the end of each year’s compliance deadline:
• the number and type of prescribed carbon units surrendered under for that period
• the methodology determinations under which any surrendered ACCUs were created.
21
