Australian Government response to the
Senate Committee Economics report:
Treasury Laws Amendment (Tax Accountability and
Fairness) Bill 2023
June, 2026

Coalition Senators’ Dissenting Report - Recommendation 3
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
Parliament passed the Government’s package of Environment Protection Reform Bills in
November 2025. The package included key measures to speed up decision making for business
and improve outcomes for the community, including:
• A new Streamlined Assessment Pathway, to reduce the timeframe for decisions when
proponents provide sufficient information upfront, providing incentive to consider new
National Environmental Standards and other requirements early in the process.
• updated arrangements for bilateral agreements with states and territories, which can remove
the need for duplicative environmental assessment and approval of projects.
• Bioregional planning, to deliver ‘go’ and ‘no go’ zones, ensuring greater certainty for business,
and future planning at a landscape scale, reducing the need for project-by-project assessment.
• Clarifying the definition of “unacceptable impacts” to help proponents avoid planning projects
that cannot be approved.
• Introducing restoration contributions to improve offsetting of residual significant impacts and
speed up approvals.
The package also included a number of environment protection measures, including:
• Establishing the National Environment Protection Agency (National EPA) – a strong,
independent regulator with a clear focus on ensuring better compliance with and stronger
enforcement of Australia’s new environmental laws.
• More regular reporting on the state of the environment.
• National Environmental Standards, to ensure clear, strong guidelines to protect the
environment.
• Higher penalties for the most significant breaches of environmental law, as well as
environment protection orders for use in urgent circumstances to prevent and respond to
major contraventions of the law.
• Ending exemptions from the EPBC Act for certain land clearing activities and regional forest
agreements, so that they comply with the same rules and standards as other industries.
• Requiring proponents of large emitting projects to disclose their greenhouse gas emissions and
their emission reduction plans.
The Government is delivering reforms that ensure sustainability and environmental protection
whilst enabling productivity growth, and investment in Australian industry.
| 1
Australian Greens’ Dissenting Report - Recommendation 2
Australian Government response
The Government rejects the premise of this recommendation.
| 2
