Australian Government response to the
Select Committee on Energy Planning and Regulation
in Australia Final Report
JUNE 2026
1
Introduction
The Senate Select Committee was convened in September 2024 to assess the institutional
structures, regulatory framework and governance of Australia's energy market during a
significant transformative period as Australia’s energy supply system transitions from
traditional coal-fired thermal generation to new-build renewable energy generation.
The Australian Government has committed to increasing the proportion of electricity that is
produced from renewable energy sources to 82% by 2030. To meet the challenges of
climate change, the government has also committed to a target of net-zero carbon emissions
by 2050. A key priority for the government is to transform Australia’s energy system to
support net zero emissions while maintaining its affordability, security and reliability.
The Government acknowledges the careful consideration behind the Select Committee’s
observations relating to energy market governance, transparency and planning effectiveness
and notes the committee’s particular focus on maintaining regulatory stability and investment
confidence within the National Electricity Market (NEM).
In responding to all recommendations, Government policy considerations include:
• Market efficiency: ensuring that reforms do not introduce distortions that undermine
competition or investment signals.
• Consumer protections: balancing affordability with the need for cost-reflective pricing
and sustainable investment.
• Reliability and security: aligning recommendations with mechanisms such as the
Capacity Investment Scheme (CIS) and Renewable Energy Zones (REZs).
• Emissions reduction commitments: ensuring consistency with legislated emissions
targets and state-based renewable energy policies.
• Investment certainty: maintaining regulatory stability to avoid deterring private sector
investment in generation and storage.
Many of the committee’s recommendations also require coordination and agreement across
other jurisdictions, due to shared responsibilities across Australia’s energy market system, or
by energy market bodies, and cannot be implemented unilaterally by the Government.
The Government recognises the importance of an electricity market that that operates as
efficiently as possible to attract investment, keep prices affordable, and accelerate the clean
energy transition. The Government commissioned an independent review of the NEM
wholesale market settings to promote future investment in renewable generation and
storage.
The NEM Review findings were delivered to Government in December 2025. Energy
Ministers considered the core recommendations and Government will consider the
implementation further in 2026.
The Government also agrees with the committee’s emphasis on appropriate reforms to
ensure Consumer Energy Resources (CER) are integrated into future ISP’s and regulated
2
effectively. Work is well underway in developing the National CER Roadmap with
consideration to establishment of a National CER Technical Regulator function.
In 2023, ECMC commissioned a review of AEMO’s Integrated System Plan (ISP) framework.
The review made 15 recommendations regarding the proposed changes to the regulatory
and operational frameworks. Energy Ministers considered the recommendations and have
agreed to a set of actions to improve energy system planning. The Government sees this as
an appropriate response to concerns about ISP transparency and effectiveness.
Finally, the Government acknowledges that energy governance architecture should continue
evolving to remain fit-for-purpose during the energy transition. It acknowledges the need for
transparency and accountability but seeks to achieve these within existing governance
frameworks without disrupting investor confidence.
3
Response to Committee’s Recommendations
Recommendation 1
5.7 The committee recommends that the Australian Government request the Productivity
Commission undertake an inquiry into the Australian energy network, with particular focus
on:
• the adequacy of the planning regime in delivering economically efficient outcomes,
including a proposed economic test as part of, or separate to, the Regulatory
Investment Test for Transmission (RIT-T);
• reviewing all current Actionable Projects within six months to ensure they provide
sufficient economic value and are in the public interest;
• the impact of opportunities in the RIT-T to increase project costs;
• the apportionment of system charges including whether project overspend risk
should be carried by consumers alone;
• transmission access and pricing reform;
• reviewing any conflicts of interest, and if required, the development of a plan of
divestiture of the Australian Energy Market Operator (AEMO) subsidiaries;
• whether responsibility for planning should be the responsibility of states and
territories rather than AEMO;
• whether conflicts of interest are arising from governments owning energy assets;
and
• undertaking an assessment of the competitive landscape across the National
Energy Market (NEM) to determine where more competition can increase
economic efficiency.
5.8 The committee also recommends the inquiry also examine whether any of the
Productivity Commission’s recommendations made in the 2013 Electricity Network
Regulation Inquiry remain outstanding or require updating.
Response
Note recommendation.
The Government agrees with the need to ensure that networks are operating efficiently and
in the best interests of consumers. Australia’s energy network is already the subject of other
current and future statutory reviews, with immediate focus being on NEM Review
implementation and the AEMC review of the ISP.
The NEM Wholesale Market Settings Review (the NEM Review) has now concluded,
delivering its final recommendations to Energy Ministers in December 2025. As per the
Terms of Reference (ToRs), the NEM Review expert panel was tasked with providing
recommendations for market settings to promote investment in firmed, renewable generation
and storage capacity in the NEM following the conclusion of Capacity Investment Scheme
(CIS) tenders in 2027. The ToRs also noted a need for a review of settings to ensure
resource adequacy reliability in the NEM at lowest cost to consumers.
The NEM Review ToRs did not include a holistic review of market body governance
arrangements. However, the Review did consider related matters where relevant to future
market design, including a recommendation that Energy Ministers consider opportunities to
4
rationalise NEM forecasting and planning documents once the ESEM framework is
established.
Separately, Energy Ministers agreed to an independent review of AEMO’s governance
arrangements. Led by Mr Nigel Ray PSM, the review is intended to ensure AEMO’s
governance arrangements remain fit for purpose now and in a future market design,
recognising AEMO’s critical role in Australia’s energy system and the energy transition. The
review is expected to report to ECMC in May 2026.Further, the Australian Energy Market
Commission (AEMC) has initiated its statutory review of the ISP framework, as required
under the National Electricity Rules (NER), which must be completed by 1 July 2027. The
AEMC published its Terms of Reference in October 2025. The review will examine all
aspects of the ISP framework, including:
• application of the regulatory investment test for transmission to actionable ISP
projects remains fit for purpose.
• content, methodology and governance of the ISP are appropriate.
• current allocation of roles and responsibilities amongst market bodies, network
service providers and governments with regard to the ISP and associated processes
as appropriate.
• ISP framework remains appropriate for National Electricity Market participants and
consumers.
Recommendation 2
5.11 The committee recommends the Energy and Climate Change Ministerial Council
(ECMC) develop and publish an updated Strategic Energy Plan.
Response
Not agree.
In May 2025, Energy Ministers agreed that the Strategic Energy Plan would not be renewed
after its expiry in November 2024. Articulation of Ministers’ strategic priorities and key areas
for action will continue to form part of the regular business of ECMC and the National Energy
Transformation Partnership (NETP).
Recommendation 3
5.14 The committee recommends terms of reference for the Australian Government’s
recently commissioned National Electricity Market wholesale market settings review to
review the governance structures of the market participants including an examination of
the responsibilities of AEMO, the Australian Energy Market Commission (AEMC),
Australian Energy Regulator (AER), and the Transmission Network Service Providers in
the Integrated System Plan (ISP), RIT-T, and Feedback Loop process.
Response
Note recommendation.
5
The NEM Wholesale Market Settings Review expert panel provided recommendations for
future market settings to promote investment in firmed, renewable generation and storage
capacity in the NEM. While the scope of the review did not explicitly include governance
arrangements, the expert panel did identify issues relevant to achieving these outcomes. In
response, the Energy and Climate Change Ministers’ Council (ECMC) commissioned a
review into Australian Energy Market Operator governance.
Recommendation 4
5.15 The committee recommends the ECMC consider requesting the Commonwealth
Finance Minister make the AEMO a corporate Commonwealth entity through a rule made
under the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013 (PGPA Act).
Response
Note recommendation.
AEMO is the independent energy markets and power systems operator for most of
Australia’s energy markets. AEMO is a public company incorporated under the Corporations
Act and recovers its operating expenses from energy market participants through a range of
fee mechanisms.
A review of AEMO’s governance arrangements was agreed by Energy Ministers in
December 2025. The independent review is being led by Mr Nigel Ray PSM and is intended
to ensure that AEMO’s governance arrangements remain fit for purpose both now and in the
future. The published Terms of Reference (ToR) on the DCCEEW Energy website explicitly
include consideration of AEMO’s governance structure (Review of AEMO Governance |
energy.gov.au).
Recommendation 5
5.17 The committee recommends the Australian Government publish on the Department
of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water’s website relevant information
about the role, function, decision-making processes and work program of the Energy and
Climate Change Ministerial Council (ECMC) and the Energy Advisory Panel (EAP),
including the terms of reference and operating charter of the EAP.
Response
Agree.
The ECMC website (https://www.energy.gov.au/energy-and-climate-change-ministerial-
council) hosts information about the ECMC's role, function and decision-making processes.
The department has published the EAP’s Operating Charter on the ECMC website (Market
bodies | energy.gov.au). This document details how the EAP operates and engages with
ECMC.
Recommendation 6
5.20 The committee recommends the ECMC direct the AEMC to conduct post
implementation reviews on rule changes to determine whether rule changes are effective
6
and operate as intended. These reviews should be published on the AEMC’s website
once concluded.
Response
Agree in principle.
AEMC’s resourcing and capacity to undertake post-implementation reviews of rule changes
will need to be carefully considered.
Recommendation 7
5.27 The committee recommends the ECMC member ministers table a statement that
each Final Integrated System Plan (ISP) meets the National Energy Objectives (NEOs) in
their parliament within 30 days of AEMO publishing the Final ISP, starting with the 2026
ISP.
Response
Not agree.
As outlined in the Statement of Role for AEMO prepared by Energy Ministers, AEMO is
expected to align the ISP with the NEO.
The ISP has a clear statutory remit and is developed by AEMO in accordance with binding
regulatory arrangements that link to the NEO. As the report notes, the NER under clauses
5.22.9 and 5.22.13 require the AER to review and report on whether AEMO has adequately
explained how it has derived key inputs and assumptions, changes over time, and
contributions to the draft ISP’s outcomes.
Recommendation 8
5.28 The committee recommends the ECMC consider a rule change so AEMO’s directors
must sign off on both Draft and Final ISP attesting the plans meet the NEO.
Response
Not agree.
As outlined in the Statement of Role for AEMO prepared by Energy Ministers, AEMO is
expected to align the ISP with the NEO.
Recommendation 9
5.30 The committee recommends the ECMC consider a rule change to remove AEMO’s
power to make projects actionable for the 2026 and 2028 ISP subject to the findings of the
Productivity Commission review (i.e., Recommendation 1).
Response
Not agree.
7
The AEMC’s review of the ISP framework commenced on 18 December 2025 and will
provide the opportunity to consider the effectiveness of the framework.
Recommendation 10
5.32 The committee recommends the ECMC consider a rule change to ensure the
modelling carried out that determines actionable projects include an economic test, labour
market impacts, pricing impacts, and productivity impacts, not just a cost-benefit analysis
process.
Response
Note recommendation.
The Government’s view is that these topics are well addressed by the existing roles other
market bodies play in the ISP review process. The AEMC has a statutory requirement to
consult on the ISP framework, and the AER routinely consults on the scope of the Cost
Benefit Analysis Guidelines for the ISP. The recommendation goes to the nature of the
regulatory tests applied and would be better considered in the context of recommendation 1.
Recommendation 11
5.35 The committee recommends the National Electricity Rules (NER) be reviewed to
accommodate a rule change that encourages greater contestability and a diversity of
providers in the NEM by adopting competitive bidding and recommendations from work
carried out by the AEMC in 2022.
Response
Note recommendation.
The AEMC consulted on such a reform in 2022 under its ‘Contestability workstream’ of its
Transmission Planning and Investment review. The AEMC paused its Contestability
workstream and considered it imprudent to commit significant industry time and resources
on a national contestability model at that time.
Any actions to implement this recommendation will need to consider the existence of
contestability regimes in NSW and Victoria.
Recommendation 12
5.37 The committee recommends the AEMO align its modelling approach with open-
source software and open data principles.
Response
Not agree.
AEMO is best placed to determine the modelling tools that best meets its objectives.
8
Recommendation 13
5.41 The committee recommends the ECMC consider a rule change to ensure the ISP
include the creation of further Candidate Development Paths that incorporate greater use
of non-network solutions and non-interconnection versions.
Response
Not agree.
The National Electricity Rules and the AER’s Cost Benefit Analysis Guidelines already
require AEMO to consider non-network solutions and non-interconnection versions.
Recommendation 14
5.42 The committee recommends the ECMC consider a rule change to amend the ISP
methodology to include consideration of additional counterfactuals when undertaking cost
benefit analyses to include consideration of non-network solutions including but not limited
to all forms of storage, Virtual Transmission Lines (VTL), virtual power plants (VPP) and
other consumer energy resources.
Response
Note recommendation.
AEMO’s approach to developing the ISP already provides for this. Further, AEMO is required
to consult on the ISP Methodology at least every four years, and has previously done so in
2021, 2023 and 2025.
Recommendation 15
5.43 The committee recommends the ECMC consider a rule change to the Cost Benefit
Analysis Guidelines so that costs deemed as ‘sunk costs’ are included in a separate
analysis so evidence is clear.
Response
Note recommendation.
This could be considered in an update to the Cost Benefit Analysis Guidelines, subject to
consideration by the Australian Energy Regulator as part of its standard processes.
Recommendation 16
5.47 The committee recommends the Australian Government adequately resource the
implementation of the Community Energy Resources (CER) Roadmap to accelerate CER
integration into future ISPs.
Response
Agree.
In the 2024-25 Budget the government provided $27.7 million to fund the delivery of reforms
under the National Consumer Energy Resources Roadmap from 2024-25 to 2025-26.
9
On 19 December 2024, the AEMC published a final determination to improve AEMO’s
consideration of demand side factors in the ISP, including the uptake and orchestration of
consumer energy resources, demand flexibility, electrification, and energy efficiency.
Recommendation 17
5.54 The committee recommends the ECMC establish a CER consumer advocacy body to
assist and enhance the work of Energy Consumers Australia (ECA).
Response
Not agree.
The Government notes, in addition to Energy Consumers Australia, consumer advocacy
currently exists through a number of bodies, advocacy groups such as The Australian
Council of Social Service (ACOSS), the St Vincent de Paul Society, the Brotherhood of St
Laurence, and the Justice and Equity Centre (formerly the Public Interest Advocacy Centre),
as well as CER specific advocates such as Solar Citizens.
Recommendation 18
5.55 The committee recommends the ECMC commission an independent review of the
ECA board to ensure that the interests of consumers are best represented by members
with appropriate skills and knowledge to do so.
Response
Note recommendation.
Members of the ECA board are appointed following an independent, competitive recruitment
process and final consideration by Energy Ministers. The skill set and expertise are part of
the Independent Energy Appointment Selection Panel’s considerations when recommending
candidates for appointment.
The independent review of Energy Consumers Australia was recently undertaken, with
Energy Ministers expected to consider the final report in 2026. The scope of the review
included governance arrangements, including the board and appropriateness of skills matrix.
Recommendation 19
5.56 The committee recommends the AER examine whether a positive duty of care
should be imposed on energy market service providers to ensure appropriate protections
are offered to consumers.
Response
Agree in principle.
The Australian Energy Regulator (AER) is actively improving consumer protections through
a combination of enhanced regulatory frameworks, strict compliance monitoring, and direct
support for consumers, particularly those experiencing vulnerability or financial hardship.
Key initiatives for 2024–2026 focus on strengthening hardship policies, improving bill
transparency, regulating prices via the Default Market Offer (DMO), and adapting to the
10
energy transition. The AER also has requested rule changes from the AEMC to reform
consumer protections for those experiencing payment difficulty.
Energy Ministers have also progressed a number of rule changes which will come into effect
this year which will:
• Prevent customers from being charged more than the standing offer price if their
initial low-cost offer changes or expires,
• Stop sneaky price hikes more than once a year,
• Ban unfair fees and card surcharges,
• Make sure hardship customers are effectively receiving the best offer their retailer
has to offer,
• Make sure customers receive the concessions they are eligible for.
In March 2025, Energy Ministers agreed to the approach for Better Energy Customer
Experiences, to assess options for modernising Australia’s consumer protection regimes,
and ensure they are appropriate as consumers’ interactions with electricity and gas retailers
change in this evolving energy market. Ministers also agreed to release a consultation
paper, inviting feedback to identify key reform priorities.
These reforms build on the reforms Energy Ministers have previously agreed. Over the past
three years, Energy and Climate Change Ministers have taken significant steps to better
protect consumer interests as energy markets transform. These consumer-focused reforms
respond to cost-of-living concerns and will facilitate easier, faster and simpler access to
cheaper energy deals, better protections to ensure everyone entitled to concessions and
discounts receives them, and increased support for those vulnerable to or facing hardship.
Work under the Better Energy Customer Experiences reform process is well underway
following Ministers’ agreement, with public consultation completed in June 2025.
Recommendation 20
5.57 The committee recommends the ECMC review the National Energy Objectives so
that greater weight is given to the long-term interests of consumers.
Response
Note recommendation.
The government considers that the NEOs are drafted so as to afford appropriate weight to
the long-term interests of consumers. An “economic efficiency” framework applies to the
NEOs, which at its core is about considering the long-term interests of consumers. Market
bodies must balance and make trade-offs between all elements of the objectives with this
fundamental consideration in mind.
11
Recommendation 21
5.60 The committee recommends the Australian Government accelerate the
establishment of a CER Technical Regulator, and the development of nationally consistent
standards and consumer frameworks.
Response
Agree.
In July 2024, Energy Ministers endorsed the National CER Roadmap which includes priority
actions to develop nationally consistent standards and a regulatory framework to set and
enforce them. In December 2025, Energy Ministers agreed to:
• 18 initial requirements for the interoperability of CER devices, which is a first step
towards nationally consistent standards, including for electric vehicle to grid systems and
for supporting better options for virtual power plants, and
• a National Technical Regulatory Framework for CER, with the detailed design to be
considered by Ministers in 2026.
Recommendation 22
5.63 The committee recommends the Australian Government undertake a comprehensive
review of network charges to ensure that consumers are not being unfairly penalised.
Response
Agree in principle.
The AEMC is currently undertaking a review which will consider this issue. The draft report
released in December 2025, contained six recommendations across three reform themes:
• Harnessing competition for all consumers
• Improving consumers ability to compare offers
• Targeting rewards and ensuring equitable cost sharing.
12
Response to Labor Senator Recommendations
Recommendation 1
1.22 Labor Senators recommend that the Australian Government and States continue to
support the Australian Energy Regulator's work to improve the efficiency of the distribution
network.
Response
Agree.
On 14 October 2024, the Government published the Consultation Regulation Impact
Statement (CRIS), seeking feedback on proposed changes to improve energy efficiency
regulations related to distribution transformers in Australia.
The Government has established a $30m competitive grants program to accelerate the
development, trialling and application of grid enhancing technologies in Australian electricity
networks. The program seeks to support technologies that increase the capacity and
efficiency of existing distribution and transmission networks.
Recommendation 2
1.30 Labor Senators recommend that the Australian Government continue to support the
implementation of recommendations and actions arising from the Commonwealth's ISP
Review.
Response
Agree.
On 3 June 2024, Minister Bowen, as Chair of the ECMC, wrote to the AEMC proposing three
rule changes in response to the ISP Review to give effect to a set of recommendations of the
Review. These were titled:
• ‘Better integrating gas into the Integrated System Plan’
• ‘Improving consideration of demand-side factors in the Integrated System Plan’, and
• ‘Incorporating community sentiment towards transmission expansion options in the
Integrated System Plan’.
On 19 December 2024, AEMC published final rule determinations. The determinations
maintain the primary intent of the rule change requests, but vary slightly in how the rules give
effect to that intent.
The government continues to work with AEMO to deliver the full suite of actions agreed by
ECMC.
13
Response to Senator Canavan’s Recommendations
Recommendation 1
1.23 Australian Government should amend the National Electricity Rules to clarify that
AEMO should run a range of scenarios in its Integrated Systems Plan including:
• a baseline scenario with no government carbon emissions or fuel type restrictions
(including no ban on nuclear);
• a scenario which only models the impact of the Commonwealth Government's
carbon emissions targets as outlined in its Nationally Determined Contribution
under the Paris Agreement; and
• a scenario that includes other government policies to reduce emissions or to
favour or penalise certain fuel types.
1.24 AEMO should report the relative impact of each of these scenarios on wholesale and
(where possible) retail electricity prices.
Response
Note recommendation.
AEMO are already required to explore different scenarios in the ISP to understand the
impacts of key uncertainties on each development path, including counterfactual scenarios
where no transmission investment takes place.
Sensible limits need to be placed upon choices of assumptions and scenarios to implement
and explore in the ISP, and aligning with current government policy across jurisdictions is a
robust, defensible and consistent way to ensure this.
Given the long-term nature of the ISP, long-term uncertainty around bidding behaviours,
market design considerations and other implications of AEMO forecasting wholesale and
retail prices as part of the ISP, the department’s view is that cost remains the most robust
and defensible measure when comparing scenarios or development paths in the ISP.
Recommendation 2
1.36 The government should add to the proposed Productivity Commission inquiry a cost-
benefit study of its net zero emissions by 2050 target. This study should look at the impact
of the target on the entire Australian economy including how higher electricity prices and
stricter carbon emissions target could impact the viability of individual Australian
manufacturing industries.
Response
Note recommendation.
In November 2025, the Government released its Net Zero Plan, supported by six sectoral
emissions reduction plans. The Net Zero Plan brings together the sectoral plans and whole
of economy strategy to both reach net zero and support Australia’s ambition for a future
made in Australia.
14
The Net Zero Plan was released with Treasury modelling demonstrating how an orderly
transition to net zero delivers stronger economic growth, more jobs, higher wages and better
living standards for Australians. It found annual GDP grows by $2.2 trillion by 2050, 81%
bigger compared to today, in the main scenario.
In comparison, a disorderly transition with no 2035 target would mean fewer job
opportunities, less business investment and lower living standards. Compared to the
Government’s plan, a disorderly transition would cost the economy a cumulative $1.2-
2 trillion to 2050.
This is similar to the 2021 Long Term Plan that an Australian net zero 2050 target “provides
net economic benefits totalling about $2000 per person in 2050 relative to the No Australian
Action scenario”. The Net Zero Plan was also informed by comprehensive analysis from the
Climate Change Authority, which included detailed modelling by the CSIRO.
Recommendation 3
1.46 The Australian Government should remove the ban on nuclear power.
Response
Not agree.
The Government has no plans to change the longstanding moratorium on nuclear power in
Australia, which is prohibited by law under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity
Conservation Act 1999 (Cth).
In the context of our own clean energy transformation, the high cost and long deployment
time of nuclear power makes it an unviable choice for Australia.
The GenCost report, prepared by the CSIRO and the AEMO, have consistently shown that
renewables are the cheapest form of generation for Australia, even when additional costs for
storage and new transmission are included. Renewable technologies are quicker to build
and cheaper to operate.
Recommendation 4
1.56 The Australian Government should drop its target of 82 per cent renewables by 2030.
Response
Not agree.
The Government is committed to delivering its target of 82% on-grid renewable electricity by
2030.
Recommendation 5
1.66 The Australian Government should expand its Capacity Investment Scheme to
include all types of power, including coal, gas and nuclear.
15
Response
Not agree.
The CIS is designed to be technology neutral among clean energy projects that can
contribute to the government’s target of 82% renewable electricity by 2030.
Coal and gas are not eligible technology types in the CIS because they are not zero
emissions technologies. On 8 December 2022, Energy Ministers agreed in principle to
establish the CIS on the basis that it would support zero emissions technology.
AEMO’s 2024 ISP forecasts no nuclear or additional coal or gas-powered generation will be
required in the NEM before 2030, outside of 2 x 200 MW gas pilot projects locked in due to
state policies. The CIS is designed to support new capacity that is required before 2030 to
support achieving the government’s 82% renewable energy by 2030 target.
The CIS is designed to complement state and territory energy policies. State and territory
governments have the power to plan their energy transition, subject to regional requirements
which may include support for coal or gas-powered generation.
Through the Future Gas Strategy, the government acknowledges that there will be a role for
reliable and affordable gas supply throughout the transition to net zero emissions.
16
Response to Senator Pocock’s Recommendations
Recommendation 1
1.19 Extend the scope of the Post-2030 Review to address the design of the National
Electricity Market as a whole. Without limiting its scope, it should:
• design for a market that will deliver a rapid transition to renewable energy and
allows for rapid technology shifts, including to technologies not yet contemplated;
• design for both utility-scale supply and the active participation of demand-side
actors; articulate this design into long-term, strategic guidance for investors and
consumers alike; advise the implications for strategic level regulatory reform,
including inter-governmental agreements, the three national energy laws and the
three market bodies;
• advise on post-2030 arrangements as per the existing Terms of Reference; and
• advise on higher-level adjustments required of policy for other components of the
market, including the demand side.
1.20 The review shall report no later than June 2026, with the option for the Minister to
extend its term should staged reporting be necessary.
Response
Note recommendation.
The NEM Wholesale Market Settings Review submitted its final report in December 2025.
The report identifies future market settings to promote investment in firmed, renewable
generation and storage capacity in the NEM. The findings of the review have been outlined
elsewhere in this response.
Recommendation 2
1.33 Commission development of a C&I Roadmap for consideration by ECMC no later
than December 2025. The Roadmap should include proposed measures, as appropriate,
in the regulatory, fiscal and taxation domains, to mobilise the potential of C&I to help meet
the capacity gaps in achieving the 2030 target of 82 per cent renewables.
Response
Note recommendation.
Work is underway to mobilise decarbonisation opportunities in the Commercial and Industrial
(C&I) sector.
The sectoral emissions reduction plans that support the Net Zero Plan include the Electricity
and Energy, Industrial, Resource and Built Environment sectors and address emissions
reduction opportunities for the C&I sector, which will be coordinated to address cross-cutting
issues including electrification, energy efficiency and demand flexibility opportunities.
The Review of Market Settings in the National Electricity Market considered how market
settings can provide effective signals to incentivise investment in the optimal mix of energy
17
resources to meet future electricity demand. This included consideration of how to enable
consumers, including C&I consumers, to benefit from and contribute to the market.
Recommendation 3
1.34 Commission an interim review of progress in implementing the CER Roadmap for
consideration by ECMC no later than June 2026, in conjunction with consideration of the
expanded Post-2030 Review. The interim review should assess the efficacy of the CER
Roadmap in mobilising CER and identify key areas that should be prioritised in order for
CER to reach its full potential with the NEM and advise on policy – regulatory, fiscal and
taxation – required for achieving this end.
Response
Agree in principle.
Progress against reform priorities under the National CER Roadmap will be reviewed and
provided for consideration by ECMC on an annual basis. An in-depth review of the Roadmap
will occur in 2027.
Recommendation 4
1.40 Commission an independent review, to be considered by ECMC no later than
December 2025, of the role and performance of DNSPs, considering their role in
facilitating the energy transition, their ability to adapt their business models to facilitate the
integration of CER, and how existing governance arrangements and regulatory oversight
ensure value for energy consumers.
Response
Agree in principle.
Other areas of reform currently underway may intersect with such a review, such as the CER
Roadmap, the AER’s Network Visibility workstream and recent rule changes submitted to the
AEMC (e.g. ECA’s rule change to implement a Distribution-level ISP-style plan).
In parallel to these existing reform initiatives, the Department will host a series of Network
Reform Roundtables in 2026. These will collect stakeholder perspectives of the most
pressing issues facing Australian Electricity Networks from both policy and regulatory
perspectives.
Recommendation 5
1.53 Submit for consideration by ECMC no later than June 2025 an action plan
responding to Recommendation 6 (‘Through the National Cabinet, task relevant ministers
to work together to overcome barriers to the energy transition’) of the Climate Change
Authority’s 2024 Annual Progress Report. The action plan to address, amongst other
things, expediting development and environmental approvals for utility-scale renewables
projects (generation, storage and transmission) under strict timescales while balancing the
interests of:
18
• biodiversity conservation and the risks to biodiversity of unabated climate change;
and
• bona fide community concerns with the risks of unabated climate change to
regional economies and social wellbeing.
Response
Agree in principle.
The Government agrees barriers to the clean energy transition should be addressed across
portfolios and jurisdictions in a coordinated manner. A range of priority work is already
progressing through ECMC and through bilateral Renewable Energy Transformation
Agreements, as well as the release of a National Renewable Energy Priority List to provide
coordinated support for regulatory planning and environmental approval processes for
identified priority renewable energy projects.
Recommendation 6
1.54 Commission for consideration by ECMC no later than June 2025 a rapid review of
implementation of the recommendations of the AEIC Review of Community Engagement.
The review should identify any gaps in policies that would assist in securing community
support for renewables projects, and particularly:
• whether government needs to regulate the process of developer consultation and
contracting with landholders and communities; and
• whether government needs to mandate decommissioning provisions that back
legal obligations upon developers with financial provisioning (insurance, trusts,
funds in escrow) to ensure those obligations can be met upon cessation of
projects.
Response
Note recommendation.
A process exists for Energy Ministers to receive progress reports on implementing the
Community Engagement Review. Jurisdictions are progressing well to fulfill their
commitments against the review’s recommendations while the Government implements the
Developer Rating Scheme.
Landholder and community engagement as well as decommissioning are criteria that will be
assessed under the Developer Rating Scheme.
Recommendation 7
1.76 Commission a review of institutional arrangements for governance of the NEM to be
conducted in parallel with, and to report to ECMC in conjunction with, the expanded
review of post-2030 arrangements. Without limiting the scope of the review, it should have
particular regard to:
• the roles and responsibilities of the four market bodies;
19
• eliminating overlap amongst the four market bodies;
• clarifying the policy lead amongst the four market bodies;
• transparency and accountability in the conduct of the four market bodies, including
in their collective advice to ECMC via the Energy Advisory Board;
• the independence of the AER vis-à-vis the ACCC;
• deconflicting the multiple roles of AEMO to restore its independence as market
operator and planner;
• relocation or spinning off of AEMO’s non-core roles, including its contracted
service roles;
• establishing independent verification of AEMO’s cost estimates and cost benefit
analyses for actionable investments;
• embedding consumer representation in the governance and executive structures
of AEMC, AER and AEMO;
• reconstituting Energy Consumers Australia to represent consumers as active
participants in CER and C&I (in addition to representing vulnerable consumers),
embedding AEC in the Energy Advisory Panel to ECMC, and funding a capability
development program to equip consumer representatives to participate in policy
and decision-making advice on par with that provided by utility-scale investors; and
• a roadmap to guide ECMC in the rapid implementation of recommendations.
Response
Agree in Principle
The Minister for Climate Change and Energy recently announced the AEMO Governance
review (Review of AEMO Governance – Terms of Reference | energy.gov.au). The review
was agreed by the Energy and Climate Ministers’ Council and is being undertaken to ensure
AEMO’s governance arrangements remain fit for purpose both now and in the future. The
broader governance framework for the Australian energy industry is set out in the Australian
Energy Market Agreement (AEMA). A review of the AEMA may be appropriate in the future,
after consideration of the outcomes of the AEMO Governance Review.
Recommendation 8
1.83 Reduce red tape in the energy market. Commission a root and branch overhaul of
the National Energy Rules and administrative procedures to make them coherent, lean,
accessible and efficient in enabling the fast-moving pace of the energy transition. The
overhaul should be commissioned to the ALRC or contracted to a suitably resourced legal
task force. The overhaul should be commenced immediately and progress in parallel with,
and be informed by, the expanded Post-2030 Review. The review should finalise no later
than December 2026, unless extended with the agreement of ECMC. The review should,
to the extent possible, report in stages that facilitate the progressive implementation of its
recommendations through legislative amendments and rule changes.
Response
Not agree.
20
It is important that energy market rules and administrative procedures are fit for purpose to
support the energy transition. The Government acknowledges the tension between
consultation and openness on the one hand, and speed of reform delivery on the other, but
considers that the balance struck by current processes is the right one.
Recommendation 9
1.89 Commission an inquiry, to report for consideration by ECMC no later than December
2025, on the nature, extent and trajectory for energy poverty resulting from the energy
transition, and recommend policies to substantively negate such poverty. The inquiry to be
led by a panel comprising experts in welfare, economics and the energy market.
Response
Note recommendation.
The National Energy Equity Framework (the Framework) was considered by ECMC in March
2025, with Energy Ministers reiterating their commitment to an equitable energy transition for
all Australians by agreeing to the Framework. The Framework provides models, tools and
guidance for energy policy makers to help ensure equity and hardship are considered in
policy and program development. This mitigates against future energy policies
unintentionally advantaging or disadvantaging different consumer cohorts.
Energy Ministers also established a community of practice across governments to guide
implementation of the Framework with the involvement of consumer advocates and other
key stakeholders.
21
