Australian Government response to the
Rural and Regional Affairs and Transport Legislation
Committee report:
Agriculture (Biosecurity Protection) Levies Bill 2024
[Provisions] and related bills
JUNE 2026
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the opportunity to respond to the Senate Rural and Regional
Affairs and Transport Legislation Committee (Committee) report: Agriculture (Biosecurity Protection)
Levies Bill 2024 [Provisions] and related bills, tabled on 10 May 2024.
The Committee made one recommendation. The Coalition Senators’ dissenting report made two
recommendations.
The bills that would provide for the imposition, collection and administration of the Biosecurity
Protection Levy (the BPL bills) passed the House of Representatives on 27 March 2024. On 12
February 2025, the Senate resolved to discharge the bills from the Notice Paper.
The Australian Government’s response to the report is below. The response addresses
recommendation 1 in the dissenting report. The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet’s
Tabling Guidelines of July 2024 do not require a government response to recommendations that a
bill be passed (report recommendation 1) or not passed (dissenting report recommendation 2).
Coalition dissenting report
Recommendation 1
That the Australian Government properly consult on a sustainable biosecurity funding mechanism
including:
• a full cost recovery basis for managing biosecurity risks of both passengers and
commodities entering Australia; and
• an import container levy to pay for the biosecurity risk created.
Government response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government has invested over $1 billion to support the Commonwealth’s biosecurity
activities. The Australian Government remains committed to a sustainably funded biosecurity
system. The Senate has withdrawn the BPL bills from the Notice Paper and the Australian
Government acknowledges that these bills will not be part of the ongoing funding solution.
The Australian Government’s 2023-24 Budget ‘Strengthened and sustainably funded biosecurity
system package’ provided:
• an ongoing uplift in taxpayers’ contribution to biosecurity activities;
• a $10 increase to the Passenger Movement Charge from $60 to $70 per traveller that
commenced on 1 July 2024;
• a return to full cost recovery for importers from 1 July 2023, including annual reviews to
ensure that cost recovery keeps pace with the cost of delivering biosecurity services; and
• the introduction of a new cost recovery charge for biosecurity clearance of declared low
value goods brought into Australian territory, that commenced on 1 October 2024.
A Biosecurity Funding and Expenditure report is now published annually, in consultation with the
Advisory Panel. This report delivers on the Australian Government’s commitment to provide greater
transparency of biosecurity activities, budget and expenditure.
The Australian Government has, and will continue to, consult biosecurity stakeholders, including
through the Sustainable Biosecurity Funding Advisory Panel, to ensure a sustainably funded
biosecurity system into the future.
