102 SENATE Wednesday, 11 March 2026
and time again. If the government believes that these tax exemptions are justified then it should have no problem
showing us the costs and being upfront about the costs. Good policy requires good scrutiny, and we cannot have
good scrutiny without honest information at the table for everyone to see. That's the least that we can provide to the
Australian people, and that's what they expect from us, because they've sent us here to make sure that we've crossed
our t's and dotted our i's.
Senator GALLAGHER (Australian Capital Territory—Minister for Finance, Minister for the Public Service,
Minister for Women, Minister for Government Services and Manager of Government Business in the Senate)
(18:43): I'd like to thank all the senators who have contributed to this debate. I note the Senate economics committee
report on the Treasury Laws Amendment (Supporting Choice in Superannuation and Other Measures) Bill 2025,
including the dissenting report and additional comments, but the government does not support the recommendations
outlined.
Schedule 1 to the bill amends the Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) Act 1992 to streamline the
superannuation choice of fund process during employee onboarding. This amendment provides greater flexibility
for employers or their agents to request an employee's existing stapled fund details from the ATO earlier in the
onboarding process. That way, if a stapled fund exists, the employer can provide those details to the employee
during onboarding.
This amendment supports the government's commitment to empowering employees to make informed choices,
by making it easier to see, consider and select their existing super fund when they start a new job—if they choose
to do so. It will also give employers more timely and accurate superannuation details, supporting their readiness for
the government's payday super reforms.
Schedule 2 of the bill amends the Corporations Act 2001 to impose a ban on advertising superannuation products
to employees during onboarding. Exceptions will be available for showing employees their stapled fund, the
employer's default fund and certain MySuper products which are subject to regulation. This amendment reinforces
the government's commitment to supporting Australians to make an informed choice about their superannuation,
while providing strong consumer protections.
Schedule 3 of the bill implements key budget measures to provide tax exemptions for the Rugby World Cup 2027
and 2029 events, which Australia is proud to host. These exemptions are a standard feature of international hosting
arrangements and are critical to fulfilling our commitments to World Rugby. The exemptions are consistent with
previous exemptions granted for events such as the 2023 FIFA Women's World Cup and the 2020 ICC T20 World
Cup. This measure is a practical and necessary step to ensure the success of these events and to uphold Australia's
reputation as a trusted and capable host of major international competitions.
Schedule 4 of the bill amends the International Tax Agreements Act 1953 to give force of law to the tax treaty
between Australia and Portugal. This treaty is the first of its kind between Australia and Portugal and is in Australia's
national interest. It will provide closer bilateral linkages with Portugal, particularly in the areas of commercial trade,
investment and innovation. It will provide Australian individuals and businesses with increased opportunities to
access capital and technology from Portugal by reducing tax on cross-border income and providing greater tax
certainty. It will also facilitate labour mobility to strengthen our cultural ties with Portugal. Finally, the treaty builds
on Australia's existing tax integrity measures, designed to combat international tax evasion and avoidance, ensuring
multinationals pay their fair share of tax.
Schedule 5 of the bill amends the income tax law to specifically list the following organisations as deductible gift
recipients: Coaxial Foundation, Community Foundations Australia, Equality Australia, Foundation Broken Hill,
Partnerships for Local Action and Community Empowerment, the Paul Ramsay Foundation, Social Enterprise
Australia, St Patrick's Cathedral Melbourne Restoration Fund, Sydney Chevra Kadisha, the Great Synagogue
Foundation and Project Parenthood Ltd. The schedule also removes the following specifically listed entities: the
Bradman Memorial Fund, Clontarf Foundation, NSCA Foundation, Sydney Talmudical College Association
Refugees Overseas Aid Fund, the Australian Future Leaders Foundation, the Ranfurly Library Service, the Roberta
Sykes Indigenous Education Foundation and WA National Parks and Reserves Association.
Schedule 6 of the bill will increase support available to all eligible wine producers under the existing wine
equalisation tax producer rebate scheme from a cap of $350,000 per financial year to $400,000 from 1 July 2026.
These changes deliver on the government's commitment to supporting the Australian wine industry as well as
regional tourism investment and job creation. I commend the bill to the Senate, and I thank senators for their
contribution.
Question negatived.
Original question agreed to.
Bill read a second time.
CHAMBER
