OFFICIAL
Australian Government response to the
House Standing Committee on Agriculture report:
Australian Food Story: Feeding the Nation and Beyond
Inquiry into food security in Australia
JUNE 2026
1
OFFICIAL
Introduction
On 26 October 2022, the House Standing Committee on Agriculture (the Committee)
commenced an inquiry into food security in Australia. The terms of reference were to inquire
into and report on strengthening and safeguarding food security in Australia, including
examining:
• national production, consumption, and export of food
• access to key inputs such as fuel, fertiliser and labour, and their impact on production
and costs
• the impact of supply chain distribution on the cost and availability of food,
• the potential opportunities and threats of climate change on food production in
Australia.
The Committee tabled its report, Australia Food Story: Feeding the Nation and Beyond (the
report), in Parliament on 6 December 2023. There are a total of 35 recommendations
covering a broad range of policy and regulatory issues, from developing a Food Plan and
establishing a National Food Council to mandating the Food and Grocery Code of Conduct.
The government thanks the Committee and the secretariat for its work to produce the report.
The government also thanks all those who contributed to the inquiry, for the high-quality
evidence and commitment to the food security of the nation.
Response
The Australian Government agrees to the first recommendation of the inquiry – the
development of a food plan - and has committed $3.5 million over two years to develop
Feeding Australia: National Food Security Strategy (the strategy). The strategy will set out a
long-term, whole-of-system plan to boost the productivity, resilience and security of our
national food system.
The government also agrees with the second recommendation of the inquiry – the
establishment of a national food council – and in November 2025 established a National
Food Council to advise government on the development of the strategy.
The government is committed to an open, consultative and transparent process to develop
the strategy. Information about the strategy, including the National Food Council and the
consultation process is available on the department’s website at
https://www.agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/farm-food-drought/food/national-food-
security-strategy.
In addition, the government has made the Food and Grocery Code of Conduct mandatory
(recommendation 6), reviewed the port code for covering grain (recommendation 17) and
provided funding to the End Food Waste Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) as part of the
CRC grants program (recommendation 22). The government supports in-principle
recognising the special circumstances of remote communities, including Indigenous
communities (recommendation 34).
2
OFFICIAL
The government notes the other 30 recommendations, which reflect the broad nature of our
food system and the complexity of food security.
A response to each recommendation is provided in Table 1. The government acknowledges
this complexity and is considering these issues as it develops the strategy. This process is
well underway, with more detail outlined below.
National Food Security Strategy
The government’s response to the Committee’s report is the commitment to develop
Feeding Australia: National Food Security Strategy (the strategy).
The government recognises that food is a fundamental human need and an essential part of
our daily lives, providing sustenance vital for health and wellbeing. All Australians are part of
the food system, from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities who care for
Country and uphold sustainable ecosystems; to our farmers and fishers who draw on natural
resources to produce our food; our people and industries who transform, transport and sell
food; and our families and communities who grow, buy, cook, and eat food.
Australia’s food system is a national asset – underpinned by strong food safety and
biosecurity measures, essential for not only nourishing our own population but also meeting
the needs of our trading partners. However, our food abundance masks uneven access and
equity. We recognise people in some regions and demographic groups experience food
insecurity. The causes of this are complex and can include a range of issues from provider
and social inequality to geographic distance, poor infrastructure and disruption of traditional
food systems.
We recognise our food system is complex, interconnected, and there are different drivers,
impacts and stakeholder views. That is why the scope and priorities of the strategy are being
developed in consultation with industry, community and government. A National Food
Council has also been established to advise on the strategy, which is made up of industry
and community experts from across the food system.
Consultation on the strategy opened with the launch of a discussion paper. It sought input on
proposed principles, key priority areas and whole of system considerations for the strategy.
We received over 400 submissions from people across Australia sharing their diverse views
and experiences. This includes industry association, farmers, retailers, manufacturers,
nonprofits, researchers, government officials, and the public.
Building on this first phase of wide, public consultation, the strategy entered a co-design
phase, with workshops held across the country from March to June 2026. A wide range of
stakeholders from all parts of the food system are participating, from producers, public health
experts, supply chain actors, to local community and consumer advocates.
The strategy is taking a whole-of-systems approach to navigate the complex interactions and
connections within the food system. While it may not be possible to address every aspect of
the food system, understanding how the strategy interacts with the food system is essential
to identify opportunities and mitigate unintended consequences that may negatively impact
outcomes for food security.
In addition, the government has commissioned a National Food Supply Chain Assessment.
The assessment will be an early action under the strategy and will initially focus on diesel
3
OFFICIAL
supply chains, and then will expand to other critical agricultural inputs, including crop
protection products and fertilisers.
The strategy will consider linkages to initiatives across government, including the:
• National Strategy for Food Security in Remote Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Communities
• National Preventative Health Strategy 2021-2030
• National Biosecurity Strategy
• National Defence Strategy
• Net Zero and Future Made in Australia agenda.
The government will continue to work across the food system in the development of the
strategy with the aim to finalise and publish the strategy by mid-2027.
4
OFFICIAL
Table 1: Summary of response to recommendations made in the House Standing Committee on Agriculture inquiry into
food security in Australia
Recommendations Australian Status
Government
Response
1 In consultation and cooperation with State and Territory Supported The government has committed $3.5 million over two years
Governments, relevant industries, sectors and the community, to develop Feeding Australia: National Food Security Strategy
develop a comprehensive National Food Plan providing for the (the strategy). The strategy will set out a long-term, whole-of-
food security, including nutritional security, of the nation and system plan to boost the productivity, resilience and security
its people. The National Food Plan must have clear objectives of our national food system.
and measurable targets set out in regular updates and action
plans, and subject to regular review.
2 The Australian Government appoint a Minister for Food, Noted The government will consider this recommendation in the
within the portfolio of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, with context of developing the strategy.
responsibility for the development and implementation of the
National Food Plan, regular monitoring and updating of the
plan, and accountability for achieving outcomes and targets
under the plan.
3 The Australian Government appoint a National Food Council, Supported On 21 November 2025, the Minister for Agriculture, Fisheries
made up of industry and community experts, to advise the and Forestry announced the appointment of the National
Minister for Food on matters pertaining to the food system, Food Council to advise government on the development of
and support the development, implementation, monitoring the strategy.
and evolution of the National Food Plan. The National Food
Council is to be supported by expert committees covering The Council’s membership reflects the diversity and
sectors including but not limited to: production, transport and complexity of Australia’s food system.
logistics, retail, health and nutrition, defence, education,
access to food, environmental sustainability, waste
management and indigenous communities.
5
OFFICIAL
Recommendations Australian Status
Government
Response
4 The Australian Government, as part of the National Food Plan, Noted The government will consider this recommendation in the
and in conjunction with industry, develop a specific strategy for context of developing the strategy.
reinvigorating the Australian dairy industry, one which lifts
profitability and production while addressing the economic and
environmental sustainability of the industry, and identifies the
resources and pathways required to achieve this.
5 The Australian Government, as part of the National Food Plan, Noted The government will consider this recommendation in the
and in conjunction with industry, develop a specific strategy for context of developing the strategy.
expanding the seafood sector, one which optimises the use of
resources while ensuring the economic and environmental
sustainability of the industry.
6 The Australian Government: Noted The Food and Grocery Code of Conduct is now mandatory as
• make the Food and Grocery Code of Conduct of 1 April 2025.
mandatory;
• review the Competition and Consumer Act 2010 to The government continuously monitors the effectiveness of
ensure fair practices between different actors in the the Competition and Consumer Act 2010 so that it is meeting
food supply chain and prevent unconscionable conduct; its objectives.
and
• institute regular Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission reviews of perishable food supply chains.
7 The Australian Government, as part of the National Food Plan, Noted The Australian Government has multiple avenues for
develop a specific strategy for expanding innovation and value investing in innovation in food production including funding
adding in food production, with a view to enhancing for the rural research and development corporations,
commercial opportunities for Australian industry and National Reconstruction Fund and CSIRO.
enhancing food security.
6
OFFICIAL
Recommendations Australian Status
Government
Response
8 The Australian Government, as part of the National Food Plan, Noted The Australian Government has multiple avenues for
develop mechanisms to promote innovation in food investing in innovation in food production including funding
production. for the rural research and development corporations,
National Reconstruction Fund and CSIRO.
9 The Australian Government, in conjunction with State and Noted The government will consider this recommendation in the
Territory Governments and industry, develop agriculture job context of developing the strategy.
hubs and a regional network engagement and implementation
plan.
10 The Australian Government, in conjunction with State and Noted The government will consider this recommendation in the
Territory Governments and local government, explore options context of developing the strategy.
for the development of urban agriculture, in particular as a
means for developing skills and encouraging careers in
agriculture.
11 The Australian Government, in conjunction with industry, Noted The government supports the use of skilled migration to
review current administration and reporting requirements for address skills shortages where no suitably qualified
seasonal and harvest work employers, with the view to Australians are available. There are a range of visa products
reducing the administrative burden and making use of available, in addition to skilled visas, to meet demand in
overseas labour more accessible. seasonal and harvest workforces, including the Pacific-
Australia Labour Mobility (PALM) scheme, Working Holiday
Makers, Designated Area Migration Agreements, and
employer sponsored visas.
Through administration of the PALM scheme, the
government engages regularly with approved employers and
industry stakeholders to understand regulatory and
7
OFFICIAL
Recommendations Australian Status
Government
Response
administrative impacts, including reporting and compliance
requirements, and to identify opportunities to improve clarity
and usability of program settings.
These engagement activities inform ongoing consideration of
the balance between accessibility to overseas labour,
administrative effort for employers, and worker protections,
particularly in agriculture and other priority food product
manufacturing sectors.
12 The Australian government support the development and Noted The $15 billion National Reconstruction Fund (NRF) facilitates
expansion of the domestic production and manufacturing of increased flows of finance into the Australian economy
essential inputs, such as fertiliser and agricultural chemicals. through targeted investment in manufacturing businesses.
The NRF provides finance (including debt, equity and
guarantees) to drive investments in 7 government identified
priority areas of the Australian economy including the value-
adding in agriculture, forestry, fisheries, food and fibre
priority area.
The NRFC has a target funding level over the medium to long
term of $500 million for the value-adding in agriculture,
forestry, fisheries, food, and fibre priority area. As of 1 April
2026, the NRFC has invested $81 million in this priority area.
The government is also supporting the development of
domestic fertiliser production through its $220 million loan to
the Perdaman Urea Project in Western Australia.
8
OFFICIAL
Recommendations Australian Status
Government
Response
In addition, as part of the development of the National Food
Security Strategy, the Government has commissioned a
National Food Supply Chain Assessment. The assessment will
initially focus on diesel supply chains, and will then expand to
other critical agricultural inputs, including crop protection
products and fertilisers.
13 The Australian Government, in conjunction with State, Noted The government will consider this recommendation in the
Territory and Local governments, develop a strategic plan to context of developing the strategy.
protect agricultural land from urban sprawl and utilisation for
non-agricultural purposes.
14 As part of the development of a National Food Plan, the Noted The government will consider this recommendation in the
Australian Government coordinate with industry in the context of developing the strategy.
development of a National Food Supply Chain Map,
identifying: where products are grown or produced and in In addition, as part of the development of the National Food
what quantity, how they are transported, where they are Security Strategy, the Government has commissioned a
processed, what the major transport routes are, the main National Food Supply Chain Assessment. The assessment will
centres for the collection and distribution of product, where initially focus on diesel supply chains, and will then expand to
transport routes are vulnerable and what happens if they are other critical agricultural inputs, including crop protection
cut. This map should also identify key inputs and vulnerabilities products and fertilisers.
to lack of supply. The Australian Government should consider
options for technical innovation in the collection, access to and
dissemination of this information and data.
15 As part of the development of a National Food Plan, the Noted The government will consider this recommendation in the
Australian Government develop a transport resilience plan context of developing the strategy, and other work to
9
OFFICIAL
Recommendations Australian Status
Government
Response
focussed on food security, including the optimal location of develop a National Freight Resilience Plan proposed under
distribution centres. the National Freight and Supply Chain Strategy.
16 The Australian Government implement the recommendations Noted The government will consider this recommendation in the
of the Productivity Commission calling for the repeal of Part X context of developing the strategy.
of the Competition and Consumer Act 2010 and the
development of a mandatory container terminal operator
code.
17 The Australian Government review the mandatory port code Supported The government has completed a review of the mandatory
covering grain ports. port code covering grain ports.
18 The Australian Government incorporate measures to eliminate Noted The government will consider this recommendation in the
food waste into the proposed National Food Plan, including: A context of developing the strategy.
national public education campaign aimed at the elimination of
household food waste, Repurposing food waste - for example It is intended that the strategy will complement and work
as animal feed or processed food, support food donations, alongside existing strategies and frameworks including
establish regional food hubs, better management of the cold Australia’s Circular Economy Framework.
chain, increasing federal funding for the food relief sector,
creating a circular economy, improve data sharing across the
food supply chain.
19 The Australian Government provide an incentive through the Noted The Government continues to support targeted, evidence-
tax system for those who donate food or related services, based measures to address food insecurity and reduce food
based on the Food Waste Tax Incentive developed by KPMG waste, including through existing grant initiatives and broader
and the Fight Food Waste Cooperative Research Centre. food system reforms.
10
OFFICIAL
Recommendations Australian Status
Government
Response
20 The Australian Government work with industry to develop a Noted The government will consider this recommendation in the
viable system for the recovery and recycling of plastic context of developing the strategy.
packaging.
21 The Australian Government, in conjunction with the food Noted The government notes that food labelling requirements,
industry, review the application of ‘best before’ and ‘use by’ including date-marking, are set through the bi-national
dates on food, and consider the use of QR codes on packaging Australia–New Zealand food regulation system.
to provide relevant information to consumers.
The use of QR codes and other digital technologies to provide
consumer information is under active consideration. Food
Standards Australia New Zealand, in collaboration with the
Food Regulation Standing Committee, is undertaking a
principles-based review of digital labelling.
22 The Australian Government develop and fund a research Supported The government has provided funding to the End Food Waste
program focussed on the development of a circular food Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) as part of the CRC grants
economy. program.
23 The Australian Government support early adopters of Noted The government will consider this recommendation in the
emissions reduction technologies in agriculture through the context of developing the strategy.
mechanism of notices of intent, to ensure they remain eligible
for Australian Carbon Credit Units under the Emissions
Reduction Fund.
24 The Australian Government work with industry and other Noted The government has established the Nature Repair Market,
stakeholders to develop standard definitions of natural capital which commenced operation on 1 March 2025. The Nature
and develop natural capital markets. Repair Market is a national, legislated biodiversity market
11
OFFICIAL
Recommendations Australian Status
Government
Response
designed to deliver high-integrity biodiversity outcomes and
increase investment in nature.
The government funded a research paper – released in
September 2025 – to explore the expansion of the Australian
Sustainable Finance Taxonomy to include the following
objectives in the agriculture and land sectors: biodiversity and
ecosystems protection, sustainable use and protection of
water resources, and pollution prevention and control.
While the research paper is not part of the formal taxonomy,
it lays the groundwork to translate Australia’s sustainable
land management activities into globally accepted sustainable
finance criteria, increasing domestic and global investment in
the sectors. Sustainable finance taxonomies support the
mobilisation of private capital toward sustainable activities
and improve market transparency.
Developing technical screening criteria for nature-related
environmental management objectives in the agriculture
sector supports a holistic approach to sustainability and
delivers the greatest impact – for farmers, landholders,
investors, banks and government.
12
OFFICIAL
Recommendations Australian Status
Government
Response
25 The Australian Government develop a funding stream for long- Noted The government will consider this recommendation in the
term, public-interest RD&E which promotes the environmental context of developing the strategy.
sustainability of agricultural production.
26 The Australian Government work with State and Territory Noted The Nature Repair Market (see Rec 24) has the potential to
Governments to ensure the financial viability of landscape drive investment in landscape restoration. The first method
restoration projects either through co-contributions from under the Market enables projects that enhance biodiversity
government or grant funding that defrays the development by replanting native forest and woodland ecosystems on
costs. historically cleared landscapes.
27 The Australian Government develop a public education Noted The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry has a
campaign to inform people of their biosecurity responsibilities range of public awareness and education materials available
and what they can do to protect the food system from possible on its website at https://www.agriculture.gov.au/biosecurity-
incursions, with a focus on individuals or organisations trade/policy/australia/public-awareness.
interacting with Australia’s international borders.
An international traveller campaign is held over the peak
Christmas holiday period to drive awareness of Australia’s
biosecurity conditions, promote compliance and educate
travellers arriving in Australia. A targeted pork biosecurity
advertising activity was held in March to April 2025 to raise
awareness of the risks associated with bringing pork products
into Australia.
The department has a new Biosecurity Business Pledge
Australia program which is a national initiative inviting
13
OFFICIAL
Recommendations Australian Status
Government
Response
businesses to take proactive steps in protecting their
operations—and Australia—from biosecurity threats.
In addition, it is a legal requirement under the Biosecurity Act
2015 that operators of incoming overseas aircraft must
ensure that each person (including a member of the crew) on
board the aircraft or vessel is given information about
biosecurity requirements under the laws of the
Commonwealth.
28 The Australian Government ensure that funding for Noted The Australian government has committed over $2 billion in
biosecurity reflects the responsibilities and benefits of additional biosecurity funding since 2022.
biosecurity for all stakeholders and the importance of
biosecurity to the nation as a whole.
29 The Australian Government conducts surveys of household Noted The government will consider this recommendation in the
food insecurity every 3 years using the United States context of developing the strategy.
Department of Agriculture Household Food Security Survey
Module (HFSSM) as a model.
30 The Australian Government, in conjunction with the State and Noted The Australian Curriculum Version 9.0 was approved by
Territory Governments, develop a school curriculum for food Education Ministers on 1 April 2022. It sets nationally agreed
and nutrition education, including the universal development expectations for what all Australian students should be
of basic cooking skills. taught, regardless of where they live or their background and
it is developed and administered by the Australian
Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority (ACARA).
The curriculum provides opportunities for students to learn
about food and nutrition from Foundation to Year 10.
14
OFFICIAL
Recommendations Australian Status
Government
Response
State and territory government and non-government
education authorities are responsible for implementing the
curriculum in schools, including determining the timing for
implementation of the revised curriculum and decisions
about any specific programs used in schools, including those
relating to food, cooking, and nutrition.
31 The Australian Government, in conjunction with the State and Noted The government will consider this recommendation in the
Territory Governments, consider the feasibility of introducing a context of developing the strategy.
schools meals program.
32 The Australian Government develops protocols that allow the Noted The government notes the Australian Research Council and
Australian Research Council and the National Health and National Health and Medical Research Council do not operate
Medical Research Council to cross fund research examining joint funding schemes but have established arrangements to
food, health and nutrition. support complementary investment across disciplines.
33 As part of the development of a National Food Plan, the Noted Improving dietary guidance is already underway, with the
Australian Government facilitate the development of: government having invested $2.5 million for the National
Improved nutritional and dietary guidance, community Health and Medical Research Council to lead a
projects designed to improve localised food systems and food comprehensive review of the Australian Dietary Guidelines.
security, supply networks aimed at local production, Public consultation on the draft revised Guidelines is
procurement, distribution and sale of fresh and nutritious anticipated during 2026.
food, especially by institutions such as hospitals, aged care
facilities and schools. programs aimed to educate groups
within communities about affordable, options to access (or
grow), prepare, cook and share nutritious food.
15
OFFICIAL
Recommendations Australian Status
Government
Response
34 As part of the development of a National Food Plan, the Supported in- The National Strategy for Food Security in Remote Aboriginal
Australian Government: recognize the special circumstances of principle and Torres Strait Islander Communities 2025-2035 was
remote communities, including Indigenous communities, in released in March 2025, with the vision that Aboriginal and
the food supply chain, make provisions for a more Torres Strait Islander people living on Country and in remote
decentralised model of distributions in regions containing communities are healthy and food secure. The Strategy was
remote communities, acknowledge community stores as an developed in partnership with Aboriginal and Torres Strait
essential community services, provide subsidies for community Islander community controlled health peak organisations,
stores in remote locations to they can provide fresh food in and state and territory governments.
regular quantities at an affordable price, amend the funding
and governance of the Remote Air Services Subsidy Scheme to Suggested actions under recommendation 34 may be
prioritise the efficient and affordable delivery of fresh fruit and considered in the context of implementing the Strategy,
vegetable to wet-season impacted communities. noting:
• the Remote Stores Efficiency and Resilience Package
responds to the proposed decentralised model of
distribution by increasing on-site cold and dry storage;
and
• the Low-cost Essentials Subsidy Scheme subsidises the
cost of 30 essential products so prices in eligible remote
stores are comparable to urban supermarkets.
35 The Australian Government assess progress towards Noted The Australian National Audit Office has audited the
implementing the recommendations made in the House of implementation of recommendations in the Indigenous
Representatives Standing Committee on Indigenous Affairs’ Affairs Portfolio and found progress is being made toward
2020 report on food pricing and food security in remote implementing the ten recommendations from the House of
Indigenous communities. Representatives Standing Committee on Indigenous Affairs
report that the Australian Government has supported.
16
