Australian Government response to the
SenateRural and Regional Affairs and Transport
Committee report:
Bank closures in regional Australia: Protecting the future
of regional banking
June 2026

Introduction
The Albanese Government recognises that access to essential banking services is vital for regional
communities and is working to ensure Australians have access to fit for purpose and sustainable
banking services over the long term.
The Australian Government thanks the Senate Rural and Regional Affairs and Transport Committee for
its work on bank closures in regional Australia and welcomes its report.
The Government is grateful to the 609 individuals and organisations who made submissions and
provided evidence over 13 public hearings, particularly those who shared their personal experiences
with the Committee.
In the period since the inquiry commenced in February 2023, the Government has taken action to
support access to banking services in regional Australia. This includes:
• Securing commitments from the major banks for a moratorium on regional branch closures until
July 2027 as well as both new and updated Bank@Post agreements between the major banks,
Macquarie Bank and Australia Post. Westpac has since extended its branch closure moratorium till
July 2030.
– Introducing the Cash Acceptance Mandate which requires fuel and grocery retailers that meet
certain criteria to accept cash payments for in person transactions of $500 or less between 7am
and 9pm from 1 January 2026.
– Releasing draft legislation for a cash distribution regulatory framework, to ensure the sector is
sustainable and can continue to serve the needs of Australians.
– Releasing the report and subsequent Government response to the Council of the Financial
Regulator’s (CFR) Review of Small and Medium Sized Banks in August 2025. CFR agencies and
the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) committed to nine actions and
the Government has accepted in-principle eight recommendations and is seeking feedback on a
ninth recommendation.
• Responding to the ACCC’s Home Loan Price Inquiry and Retail Deposit Inquiry in June 2025.
• The Behavioural Economics Team of the Australian Government (BETA) releasing its research on
barriers to financial product switching in November 2025.
In addition, the Australian Banking Association has updated the Banking Code of Practice and Bank
Branch Closure Protocol, which came into force on 1 July 2023 and 28 February 2025, respectively.
Introduction | 1
Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government adopt a policy recognising access to
financial services as an essential service. To this end, it should commit to guaranteeing reasonable
access to cash and financial services for all Australians.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government recognises that access to cash and bank banking services are critical to regional
Australia. As more Australians move to online banking, the Government is taking action to make
sure regional communities are not left behind.
On 11 February 2025, the Treasurer announced that the Government had secured a package of
commitments from the banks to ensure banking services remain available in regional Australia.
The commitments include a major bank moratorium on regional branch closures until July 2027 as
well as new and updated Bank@Post agreements with Australia Post. Westpac has subsequently
announced an extension of its moratorium to 2030.
The Government is continuing to work with regulators, industry and communities to ensure our
regions have access to fit-for purpose and sustainable banking services over the long term.
In the 2023 Strategic Plan for Australia’s Payment System, the Government committed to support
Australians access to cash for as long as they wish to use it. From 1 January 2026, new rules
mandated by the Government require fuel and grocery retailers to accept cash in certain
circumstances, with appropriate exemptions for small businesses. In addition to fuel and
groceries, Australians can pay their bills in cash at their local Australia Post outlet through Post
Billpay.
In April 2026, the Government released draft legislation for a cash distribution regulatory
framework to support the sustainability of the sector and access to cash for Australians. The draft
legislation includes powers to ensure cash distribution services are provided on fair terms,
minimum service level standards for regional customers, and that regulators have appropriate
powers to support continuity of critical services. The draft legislation follows recommendations
from the Council of Financial Regulators.
2 | Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government commission an expert panel to
investigate the feasibility of establishing a publicly owned bank. In investigating this, the panel
should examine options including but not limited to a stand-alone public bank or one associated
with, and using the branch network of Australia Post.
Australian Government response
The Government does not support this recommendation.
The Government believes a well-regulated and competitive market for banking services is the best
way to achieve the goal of promoting access to value-for-money financial services that meet the
needs of businesses and consumers.
The establishment of a publicly owned bank would carry significant costs and risks for
government and, ultimately, taxpayers.
Bank@Post services already support the provision of banking services for over 75 banks in more
than 3,300 locations, including more than 1,800 locations in regional and remote Australia.
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government urgently develop a mandatory
Banking Code of Conduct or Customer Service Code (Code), incorporating a robust branch closure
process, to be administered by a regulator with expertise in consumer protection. The new Code
would require financial institutions to:
• undertake meaningful consultation with communities before a branch is closed;
• prepare and submit a comprehensive report on the potential impacts of the closure and
identify alternative financial services in the event of closure; and
• implement and fully fund transition arrangements and ongoing support services which
ensure access to cash and essential banking services following a closure.
The committee recommends that the regulator would assess compliance with the Code before
any closure is agreed to.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Banking Association’s Branch Closure Support Protocol and Banking Code of
Practice were both updated during the Committee’s inquiry. The updated protocol came into
effect on 1 July 2023 and the updated Code came into effect on 28 February 2025.
The Government has secured commitments from the major banks for a moratorium on regional
branch closures until July 2027. Westpac has since extended its branch closure moratorium till
July 2030.
Response to the recommendations | 3
Recommendation 4
In enforcing the mandatory Banking Code outlined in Recommendation 3, the committee
recommends that the regulator be authorised to approve or defer any closure request. In
deferring a closure, the regulator would be authorised to direct a bank to take certain reasonable
actions, including to order further consultation or provide additional information to the regulator.
The regulator should be provided with a range of penalties should a bank fail to comply with an
order to defer closure, or with any other undertaking.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
See the Government response to recommendation 3.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government commission the Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission to explore the barriers to customers switching banks,
with a view to allowing those that open and/or maintain branches in regional, rural and remote
towns to attract more business.
Australian Government response
The Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
The ACCC delivered inquiries into the Home Loan Pricing and Retail Deposit Markets in 2020 and
2023 respectively. The Government’s response to these inquiries was announced on 15 June
2024. BETA has conducted research to understand barriers to Australians getting a better deal on
their banking products and ways to help. Its report was released on 20 November 2025.
On 8 July 2024, the Government asked the CFR, in consultation with the ACCC to conduct a review
of competition in the small and medium-sized banking sectors. The CFR Review into Small and
Medium Sized Banks’ examination also included an assessment of current bank switching activity,
including the barriers to, and the benefits of, switching banks and noted that there are a range of
reasons why consumers may not switch, including regulatory, structural and behavioural. The
Government responded to the review in August 2025 welcoming nine actions from regulators,
agreeing in-principle to eight recommendations and seeking feedback on a ninth
recommendation.
4 | Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends the Australian Government establish the Regional Community
Banking Branch Program (RCBBP). The objective of the RCBBP would be to help underwrite the
establishment of ‘community bank' branches providing in-person banking services in regional,
rural and remote Australia. Local communities would be required to raise their own capital as
well, but the government contributions could help lower the required amounts. Consideration
could also be given to using this fund to help enhance financial services available at Australia Post.
To support the RCBBP, the committee recommends that the Australian Government establish a
supplement to the Major Banks Levy to be levied on the major banks. Funds raised by the
supplement must be hypothecated to provide funding to the RCBBP.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
On 11 February 2025, the Treasurer announced that the Government had secured a package of
commitments from the banks to ensure banking services remain available in regional Australia.
The commitments include a major bank moratorium on regional branch closures until July 2027 as
well as new and updated Bank@Post agreements with Australia Post. Westpac has subsequently
announced an extension of its moratorium to 2030.
The Government is continuing to work with regulators, industry and communities to ensure our
regions have access to fit-for purpose and sustainable banking services over the long term.
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government works closely with the banks and
Australia Post, to require all major banks to have agreements with Bank@Post and to harmonise
the terms of Bank@Post agreements to improve fairness and sustainability. Specifically,
agreements should include increased deposit limits to support small businesses, provisions to
facilitate identification verification, and to handle issues around temporary account closures or
multiple signatory requirements.
Major banks that do not put in place agreements with Bank@Post to deliver financial services
should pay an increased supplementary levy as described in Recommendation 6.
Australian Government response
The Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
The Government has secured new and updated agreements between all four major banks,
Macquarie Bank and Australia Post for Bank@Post since the publication of this report. The ANZ
and Macquarie Bank agreements are both new agreements.
Response to the recommendations | 5
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends that the ACCC consider measures to protect access to personal and
business banking services in regional, rural and remote locations. This may include, but not be
limited to, proposing an authorisation to circumvent anti-competitive laws such that banks can
cooperate for the purposes of reducing the impacts of bank branch closures on regional
communities.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
On 8 July 2024, the Government asked the CFR, in consultation with the ACCC, to conduct a
Review into Small and Medium Sized Banks. The Final Report of the Review, released on 6 August
2025, included an examination of lowering barriers to collaboration.
As part of the Final Report, the ACCC committed to communicating its openness to consider
proposals involving collaboration between small banks including authorisations to support access
to cash. The ACCC also made specific commitments to engage early in the development of
proposals and provide clear guidance on options and processes, where relevant.
6 | Response to the recommendations
