Australian Government response to the Foreign Affairs,
Defence and Trade References Committee report:
National Volunteer Incentive Scheme (Climate Army)
June 2026
Introduction
On 26 August 2025, the Senate referred the National Volunteer Incentive Scheme (Climate Army) to
the Senate Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade References Committee (the Committee) for inquiry
and report by 6 November 2025. The inquiry was a re-referral of the inquiry on the same topic that
lapsed at the end of the 47th Parliament, and the terms of reference remain unchanged in the 48th
Parliament.
The terms of reference for the inquiry were:
The formation of a National Volunteer Incentive Scheme (Climate Army) to respond to the
immediate aftermath of natural disasters in Australia, with particular reference to:
1. establishing targeted initiatives to encourage young people to participate in the National
Volunteer Incentive Scheme (Climate Army);
2. exploring strategies to enhance volunteer engagement, including systems to recognise and
compensate volunteers to promote satisfaction and positive culture;
3. integrating volunteer opportunities within educational institutions to increase student
participation in volunteer organisations;
4. creating a nationally recognised qualification scheme that provides tangible benefits to
volunteers and formally acknowledges their skills and contributions across sectors;
5. investigating whether there are appropriate laws and safeguards to protect the health and
safety of volunteers;
6. the structure and governance of the National Volunteer Incentive Scheme (Climate Army);
7. comparison of relevant overseas models and best practices; and
8. any other related matters.
On 6 November 2025, the Committee tabled its report. The Australian Government thanks the
Committee and the secretariat for the report, and everyone who contributed to the Inquiry.
The Government recognises the many Australians who volunteer, dedicating themselves to saving
lives and supporting communities in the face of extreme weather and disasters. We value their
contribution to Australia’s preparedness, and their role in building Australia’s national resilience.
The Government will continue to work collaboratively with state and territory governments to
enhance volunteering arrangements across Australia. This is to support the volunteers who support
our communities, and to maintain Australians’ trust and confidence in the nation’s disaster
preparedness, response and recovery capabilities.
2
Recommendation 1:
The committee recommends that the Australian Government undertakes deeper consultation
with the emergency response and broader volunteering sectors before any decisions about the
feasibility, risks and benefits of establishing a national volunteer incentive scheme are made.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government acknowledges the importance of consultation in developing any
strategies seeking to address challenges in attracting, supporting and retaining volunteers who serve
communities facing extreme weather and disasters.
As many submissions to the Inquiry noted, establishing a national-level scheme to mobilise
volunteers for disaster response would duplicate functions delivered by existing organisations at the
national, state and local levels. The Australian Government supports working collaboratively with
states and territories, who are responsible for many emergency services organisations that rely on
volunteers within their jurisdictions, and in consultation with the non-government sector, to address
the barriers and challenges specific to emergency volunteering.
This engagement is already underway. The Australian Government, together with state and territory
governments is supporting the development of a National Emergency Volunteering Strategy,
through the National Emergency Management Ministers’ Meeting
The Minister for Emergency Management chairs the National Emergency Management Ministers’
Meeting, which brings together emergency management portfolio ministers from all Australian
jurisdictions, and the President of the Australian Local Government Association. Together their
purpose is to drive national cooperation and a consistent approach to managing emergencies. Their
focus is addressing long-term, strategic issues in disaster management and resilience, reporting to
National Cabinet each year.
The draft National Emergency Volunteering Strategy is based on six priority areas identified through
consultation as being vital to strengthening emergency volunteering across Australia. The six priority
areas are: Training and Compliance; Incentives; Insurance and Protection; Disaster Funding; Honours
and Awards; and Surge Capability. Many of these are consistent with issues canvassed by the
Inquiry. The National Emergency Volunteering Strategy also considers the roles of volunteers beyond
response, extending to those involved in prevention, preparedness, relief and recovery roles.
Consultation on the draft National Emergency Volunteering Strategy will continue in 2026.
Recommendation 2:
The committee recommends that the Australian Government avoid using the term ‘Climate Army’
if any type of a national volunteer incentive scheme is implemented in the future.
The Australian Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
3
The Australian Government acknowledges the term ’Climate Army’ is not supported by volunteers,
as detailed in evidence to the Committee. The Government considers this military-stye framing does
not accurately capture the nature and spirit of emergency volunteering, nor is it an appropriate way
to describe the diverse functions volunteers provide in an emergency context, including community
relief and recovery.
Additional Recommendations
Recommendation 1:
Establish a National Volunteer Resilience Framework to coordinate training, safety, recognition
and data across states, integrating with existing emergency services rather than duplicating them.
Recommendation 4:
Develop a nationally recognised credentialing system to provide portable qualifications in disaster
response, safety and leadership, with recognition across education and employment sectors.
The Australian Government agrees in principle with recommendation 1 and notes
Recommendation 4
Enhancing volunteer training, education, safety and recognition are among the six priority areas
being addressed through the National Emergency Volunteering Strategy. This includes modernising
training and compliance systems and supporting the development of portable skills. The Australian
Government will work collaboratively with state and territory governments to support these
initiatives.
These efforts will build on a strong foundation. Australia’s Vocational Education and Training (VET)
system provides nationally recognised training and is designed to support a range of national needs
and priorities.
This includes the Public Safety Training Package (PUA) which provides nationally endorsed
qualifications to support emergency prevention, preparedness, response and recovery capabilities,
including units designed for public safety roles, such as volunteers in Firefighting and State
Emergency Services. It contains nationally recognised training products, including endorsed training
package qualifications, units of competency and skillsets that support the delivery and maintenance
of contemporary knowledge and skills across the public safety industry-sector.
Public Skills Australia is responsible for the implementation and development of the Public Safety
Training Package, including updates to ensure the responsiveness and relevance of training
products. Public Skills Australia is one of 10 established Jobs and Skills Councils in Australia, funded
by the Australian Government. Jobs and Skills Councils provide industry with a stronger, more
strategic voice to ensure Australia’s Vocational Education and Training sector delivers better
outcomes for learners and employers. As a national network of industry owned and industry-led
organisations, Jobs and Skills Councils provide strategic leadership in addressing skills and workforce
challenges for their sectors. Public Skills Australia is the Jobs and Skills Council responsible for the
4
Public Safety and Government sector, including career and volunteer workforces within Fire and
Emergency Services.
Public Skills Australia is currently finalising a Volunteer Leadership Research project focused on
leadership training opportunities for non-operational emergency volunteer roles. The project is
expected to produce recommendations regarding existing training products and assess whether
additional training products are required to better support volunteer leadership.
Recommendation 2:
Undertake further consultation with young Australians about volunteering, with a focus on
identifying the barriers to participation and the incentives and supports needed to encourage
sustained involvement in disaster preparedness and response.
The Australian Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
The Australian Government recognises young people’s resilience, strength and capacity to lead
positive change across Australia. In November 2025, Public Skills Australia, whose role is outlined in
response to Additional Recommendations 1 and 4 above, released its 2025 Workforce
Insights Report for Public Safety, covering Defence, Fire and Emergency Services, and Police. This
report highlighted youth engagement and retention in volunteering as a key workforce challenge
within the sector. In response, Public Skills Australia proposes to undertake further work in
partnership with volunteer organisations to examine the factors influencing youth attraction,
recruitment, and retention in the fire and emergency services context.
The Australian Government has implemented a Youth Engagement Model to give young people
opportunity to engage on the policies and programs that impact them. The Office for Youth is a
dedicated unit in the Department of Education that supports the contribution of young people and
advocates, improves and harmonises policy across government, and ensures government is
communicating effectively with young people. This mechanism has been used to undertake
consultation with young Australians about volunteering and emergency management, and remains
available to support youth engagement moving forward.
Recommendation 3:
Ensure volunteers have access to adequate resources, equipment and nationally consistent
training and support to carry out their duties safely and effectively.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government’s support for nationally consistent training through the VET sector and
initiatives underway to strengthen these arrangements are outlined in response to Additional
Recommendations 1 and 4.
Responsibility for providing resources, equipment and a safe environment for volunteers rests with
the relevant volunteering organisations, some of which are part of state and territory governments.
5
The Australian Government does support the delivery of generalist training and resources to
strengthen volunteer management practices nationally through the Volunteer Management Activity
(VMA). The VMA is funded through the Department of Social Services and delivered by state and
territory volunteering peak bodies. The VMA is designed to modernise and strengthen volunteering
by building the capacity of organisations to recruit, train, manage and retain volunteers. It focuses
on digital tools, best-practice training, improving regional coverage, and reducing barriers for priority
groups. This includes training to support volunteer recruitment and retention, inclusive volunteering
practices, and resources linked to the National Standards for Volunteer Involvement. It also provides
free legal resources and services that are developed and delivered by Justice Connect for not-for-
profit community organisations that engage volunteers.
The Australian Government’s Volunteer Grants program, provides $10 million annually to support
eligible not-for-profit organisations to access resources such as online communication and insurance
items, small equipment, training, reimbursement of fuel costs and background screening checks.
The Australian Government also currently funds targeted mental health support for emergency
services workers including eligible volunteers, such as:
• the Mental Health Support for Emergency Services Workers Grant Program delivered by
Fortem Australia;
• the Black Dog Institute’s National Emergency Worker Support Service; and
• the Australian Psychological Society’s Disaster Response Network.
Recommendation 5:
Explore options to incentivise youth participation, including education credits, HECS or TAFE fee
reductions or integration of volunteering into secondary and tertiary curricula.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government acknowledges volunteering supports young people’s civic engagement,
skill development and career exploration.
Version 9.0 of the Australian Curriculum was agreed by all Education Ministers on 1 April 2022. It
incorporates volunteering into secondary curricula, particularly in relation to career education and
pathway planning, to build essential employability skills, enhance career development, and support
transition planning. Volunteering is recognised as a valuable component of career pathways,
fostering skills, community engagement, and personal, social, and emotional growth as part of the
curriculum's general capabilities.
The Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority is currently developing a curriculum
connection resource that supports schools to better identify and plan career education using existing
Australian Curriculum V 9.0 content from across learning areas. In response to requests to better
integrate volunteering through education settings, the resource will reference volunteering in its key
aspects as a meaningful context for career development learning and pathway exploration.
6
This work will be aligned to the Australian Blueprint for Career Development (a resource for career
development practitioners and others with an interest in career development), and its core career
management competencies. It will make clear how volunteering can support career development
and build transferable skills. It will also support schools to embed volunteering as a meaningful
learning context using existing Australian Curriculum content.
Recommendation 6:
Invest in community resilience projects to maintain engagement between disaster events and
shift investment toward prevention and mitigation.
The Australian Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
The Disaster Ready Fund is the Australian Government’s flagship disaster risk reduction and
resilience program, providing up to $1 billion over five years from 1 July 2023. The program is
delivered with funding contributions from state and territory governments. Three rounds of up to
$200 million in Australian Government funding per round have already been announced, providing
investments in community resilience across Australia.
For example in Round 3, the Australian Government committed $1.5 million for the
Northern Rivers Community Resilience Alliance for the Connected and Prepared project, with a
further $375,682 co-contributed by the NSW Government. The project aims to deliver a step-change
in disaster resilience by supporting at least 60 independent, grassroots volunteer-led resilience
groups. Through tailored support for these groups to develop sustainable governance systems,
processes, tools and structures, the project lays the groundwork for scalable, regional disaster
preparedness.
The Australian Government also invests in community resilience and risk reduction through the
Disaster Recovery Funding Arrangements, the joint cost sharing arrangements with states and
territories for disaster response and recovery. Under the arrangements, the Prime Minister may
agree to share the costs of a range of initiatives that states and territories request to support
community recovery and to ‘build back better’ after a disaster. Examples include grants for small
businesses and not-for-profit organisations, community mental health and wellbeing programs, and
rebuilding communities and infrastructure to a more resilient standard.
Recommendation 7:
Ensure there is clear separation from Defence resources, by establishing the Climate Army as a
distinct civilian capability that supports, but does not draw from, ADF personnel or funding.
The Australian Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
The Australian Government is collaborating with states and territories to address the challenges to
emergency volunteering through the approaches outlined in response to the Recommendations
7
above. These maintain a clear distinction between volunteering organisations and the Australian
Defence Force.
Separately, the Australian Government will consider requests from states and territories for
Australian Defence Force assistance with disaster preparedness, response or recovery when local
capabilities are not sufficient, overwhelmed or no alternative is available. The Defence Assistance to
the Civil Community Guidelines provide for this support, which remains an option of last resort to
ensure Australian communities facing crisis are safe and protected.
8
