Australian Government response to the
Senate Economics References Committee report:
Systemic, sustained and shameful: unlawful underpayment of
employees’ remuneration
APRIL 2023
1
Overview of inquiry process
On 13 November 2019, the Senate referred an inquiry into the causes, extent and effects of
unlawful non-payment or underpayment of employees’ remuneration by employers and
measures that can be taken to address the issue.
The committee was chaired by Senators Alex Gallacher, Kimberley Kitching and
Anthony Chisholm throughout the term of the inquiry. Senators Slade Brockman and Paul
Scarr each served as deputy chair. The members of the committee were Senators Andrew
Bragg, Jenny McAllister, Rex Patrick and Jess Walsh. Other participating members were
Senators Mehreen Faruqi, Susan McDonald, Deborah O’Neill, Tony Sheldon and David Van.
The committee accepted 130 submissions from a broad range of stakeholders including
unions, peak bodies and associations, academics, state governments, federal bodies, the
higher education sector, and legal representatives. As well, the committee held four public
hearings.
The evidence received by the committee allowed it to consider the following issues:
• the nature and extent of underpayment;
• vulnerable workers, including women, migrants, young people, international students,
and First Nations people;
• the impact of underpayment on workers, their families and wider society;
• the regulatory and enforcement framework;
• the role of unions; and
• underpayment in various sectors, particularly the higher education sector.
The committee was originally due to report to the Senate by the last sitting day in
June 2020. The inquiry was extended five times, partly due to the impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic, with the final extension granted on 10 February 2022 requiring the committee to
report by 30 March 2022.
The committee tabled its report Systemic, sustained and shameful: Unlawful underpayment
of employees’ remuneration on 30 March 2022.
Introduction
The Government acknowledges the important work of the committee and welcomes the
opportunity to respond to its report, Systemic, sustained and shameful: Unlawful
underpayment of employees’ remuneration.
The Government stands for the protection of wages and conditions of workers in Australia
and against their exploitation. The committee’s findings of deliberate and systematic
underpayment in many industries clearly demonstrates the need for meaningful reforms to
eradicate the pervasive and persistent underpayment of employees. Unlawful
underpayment robs workers of their lawful entitlements and puts downward pressure on
wages and conditions.
The important work of the committee demonstrates a need to improve the compliance and
enforcement system; both with respect to deterring and punishing unlawful underpayment
by employers, and by making it easier for employees to seek effective redress.
2
A number of the committee’s recommendations align with the policies that the Government
took to the election and that will therefore be delivered. These include:
• criminalising wage theft
• including superannuation in the Fair Work Act 2009 (Fair Work Act) as a recoverable
employment entitlement
• implementing all recommendations of the Migrant Workers’ Taskforce
• leading cultural change by committing the Australian Government to being a model
employer
• setting targets for the Australian Taxation Office for the recovery of unpaid
Superannuation Guarantee amounts.
The Government notes that some of the committee’s recommendations align with the
reports of the Senate Select Committee on Job Security, which was also tabled on 30 March
2022. The response to this inquiry will be tabled in due course.
The Senate Select Committee on Job Security found that workers engaged in insecure work
may be more vulnerable to exploitation, wage theft and underpayment as they are likely to
be more reluctant to report issues for fear of dismissal or other adverse treatment. The
Government acknowledges these findings and notes the following commitments to tackle
the underlying issue of insecure work:
• including job security as an object of the Fair Work Act to ensure job security is central
to the Fair Work Commission carrying out its functions
• extending the powers of the Fair Work Commission to include “employee-like” forms of
work to equip the tribunal to respond to new and evolving forms of work and workplace
arrangements
• reforms to limit the use of consecutive fixed-term contracts as a method to set up
insecure work arrangements
• exploring options to develop a portable entitlement scheme for Australians in insecure
work.
3
Committee recommendation Government response
Recommendation 1 Accepted.
The committee recommends that the The Government has committed to
Australian Government prioritise criminalising wage theft in its Secure
amendments to the Fair Work Act 2009 to Australian Jobs Plan. In that commitment,
criminalise wage theft in Australia, and that the Government has indicated it will
such legislation: develop legislation in consultation with key
stakeholders, including the states and
• apply to the theft of all employee
territories.
remuneration (including loadings,
penalty rates, overtime, leave,
allowances and superannuation
guarantee);
• include penalties for the falsification of
records; and
• is drafted in consultation with the
states to ensure Commonwealth wage
theft laws do not weaken existing state
legislation.
Recommendation 2 Accepted.
The committee recommends that the The Government is committed to ensuring
Australian Government amend the Fair that the compliance and enforcement
Work Act 2009 to: settings in the Fair Work Act address the
serious problem of wage theft.
• increase civil penalties for wage theft;
• make it an offence for employers to
The Fair Work Legislation Amendment
advertise employment with a rate of
(Secure Jobs, Better Pay) Act 2022 prohibits
pay less than the national minimum
the advertisement of a job with a pay rate
wage; and
that would breach the Fair Work Act or a
• capture all parties and individuals that
fair work instrument. This includes
directly participate in wage theft,
advertising employment below the National
including those who knowingly or
Minimum Wage, where that is the
recklessly create an environment of
applicable rate of pay.
wage theft (including franchisors,
advisors, head contractors and other
In considering how to introduce a criminal
third-party participants in supply
penalty for wage theft, the Government
chains).
will consider how the offence best fits with
existing civil penalties to ensure there is an
appropriate range of penalties to deal with
the spectrum of behaviour that deprives
workers of their entitlements, which can
include wage theft.
4
In addition to its commitment to criminalise
wage theft, the Government has
committed in its Plan to Build a Stronger
Pacific Family to implementing the
recommendations of the Migrant Workers’
Taskforce. This includes recommendations
to increase civil penalties for wage
exploitation and extend accessorial liability
provisions of the Fair Work Act to also
cover situations where businesses contract
out services to persons.
Recommendation 3 Noted.
The committee recommends that the The Government considers that wage theft
Australian Government consider tasking the is not only unfair to workers who do not
Australian Competition and Consumer receive their lawful entitlements, but also
Commission to bring forward a legislative unfair to law-abiding employers who may
amendment to the Competition and not be able to compete with employers
Consumer Act 2010 to incorporate wage who do not pay full lawful entitlements to
theft as an anti-competitive practice. their employees.
The Government notes this
recommendation because it considers that
wage theft can appropriately be covered by
the national industrial relations system as
set out in the Fair Work Act and as
regulated by the Fair Work Ombudsman.
The Government is committed to ensuring
that the Fair Work Act provides the Fair
Work Ombudsman with appropriate
statutory enforcement tools to deter wage
theft and hold wrong-doers to account.
Recommendation 4 Noted.
The committee recommends that the As the Committee notes, ASIC’s
Australian Securities and Investments enforcement actions are a matter for ASIC
Commission improve enforcement action as an independent commission.
and director disqualifications from
managing a company, where companies However, the Government is committed to
use Superannuation Guarantee payments ensuring that strong enforcement tools are
or wages owed to trade while otherwise available to ASIC so that it can effectively
insolvent. address non-compliance by directors and
companies, including in circumstances
5
where employment entitlements have not
been paid.
Recommendation 5 Accepted in-principle.
The committee recommends that the The Government is committed to deterring
Australian Government establish a small wage theft, and ensuring that where it does
claims tribunal, ideally co-located with the occur, workers should be able to recover
Fair Work Commission, to create a simple, their unpaid entitlements quickly and
affordable, accessible, and efficient process easily.
for employees to pursue wage theft,
including Superannuation Guarantee non- The Government supports a simple and
compliance. cheap small claims process under the Fair
Work Act. In the 2022-23 Budget, the
Government provided funding for a review
of the effectiveness of the Fair Work Act
small claims process, in line with the
recommendations of the 2019 Migrant
Workers’ Taskforce report. This review will
occur over 2023. Establishing a dedicated
tribunal would require further
consideration. Among other potential
reforms, the review will consider the merits
of a dedicated small claims tribunal as
recommended by the committee.
In addition to this review, the
Government’s Fair Work Legislation
Amendment (Secure Jobs, Better Pay) Act
2022 makes immediate reforms to the
small claims process in the courts, under
the Fair Work Act, to address issues cited
by the committee. This includes:
• increasing the cap on small claims
recovery from $20,000 to $100,000 to
enable a greater number of workers to
benefit from this mechanism, and
• clarifying the courts’ ability to award
filing fees as costs to successful small
claims applicants to reduce the
disincentive that these fees may
otherwise have on applicants.
6
Recommendation 6 Accepted in-principle.
The committee recommends that the The Government is committed to ensuring
Australian Government, through the that individuals who receive wages
Australian Taxation Office, review the repayments as lump sums are not penalised
taxation treatment of wages repaid to through a higher tax liability purely because
employees following incidents of wage of the timing of the payment.
theft to ensure they are treated no less
favourably than if wages were paid when The tax law treats wages paid as a lump
they were due. sum and in arrears, such as for the
underpayment of wages and salary, as
taxable. The repayment of wages and salary
following incidents of wage theft can
therefore result in a one-off increase to an
individual’s taxable income in the income
year it is received.
There are two tax offsets available to
individuals that can reduce their tax liability
following receipt of lump sum payments:
the lump sum payment in arrears tax offset,
and the Medicare levy surcharge lump sum
payments in arrears tax offset.
These offsets generally operate to ensure
that most taxpayers are no worse off,
relative to their position had they been
paid correctly in prior years. However, in
certain circumstances taxpayers may face
higher tax liabilities, for example taxpayers
who would not have otherwise been liable
for the Medicare levy.
Recommendation 7 Accepted in-principle.
The committee recommends that the
Australian Government review whether The Government appreciates concerns
employee representatives that hold 'right raised by witnesses that the restrictions on
of entry' permits can be better utilised to permit holders may not always be
inspect and investigate potential appropriate in the context of
underpayments across workplaces. underpayments and exploitation.
The Government will continue to monitor
the effectiveness of the right of entry
framework in deterring underpayments,
including the powers of permit holders to
investigate suspected contraventions, to
7
ensure they are appropriate to enforce the
workplace rights of employees.
Recommendation 8 Accepted in-principle.
The committee recommends that the The Government appreciates that in some
Australian Government amend the circumstances, conduct that prevents a
Fair Work Act 2009 to include provisions permit holder from effectively investigating
relating to the production of documents to a suspected contravention is treated
permit holders, to: differently than if the same had occurred
with a Fair Work Inspector. The
• introduce a penalty for individuals or
Government will continue to monitor the
entities that provide false or misleading
effectiveness of the right of entry
documents to a permit holder
framework in deterring the provision of
exercising right of entry; and
false and misleading documents, to ensure
• expand section 557C to apply to the
that it is appropriate to enforce the
failure to produce accurate documents
workplace rights of employees.
to a permit holder exercising right of
entry.
The Government notes that the Fair Work
Act already provides penalties for
individuals who refuse entry, delay, hinder
or obstruct a permit holder, including by
providing false or misleading documents.
The Government also considers that the
proposed amendment to section 557C of
the Fair Work Act is not required, because
section 557C would already apply to the
failure to produce accurate documents,
including to a permit holder exercising right
of entry.
Recommendation 9 Accepted in-principle.
The committee recommends that the The Government is committed to ensuring
Australian Government consider bringing that employees receive the entirety of their
forward amendments to the lawful entitlements, including
Superannuation Guarantee (Administration) superannuation.
Act 1992 to:
That is why the Government has committed
• require Superannuation Guarantee
to including superannuation in the Fair
payments to be aligned with the
Work Act (see response to
payment of wages;
Recommendation 10); and to set targets for
• require Superannuation Guarantee
the Australian Taxation Office for the
payments to be made on every dollar
recovery of unpaid Superannuation
earned to achieve simplicity and ease of
Guarantee amounts.
compliance; and
8
• consider an incremental The Government will consider the
implementation strategy, similar to that desirability of these proposed amendments
used for the rollout of Single Touch to the Superannuation Guarantee
Payroll, to ensure small businesses are (Administration) Act.
adequately prepared for changes to the
timing of Superannuation Guarantee
payments.
Recommendation 10 Accepted.
The committee recommends that the Consistent with its commitment in the
Australian Government include Secure Australian Jobs Plan, the
superannuation in the National Government will introduce legislation in
Employment Standards. due course to include superannuation in
the Fair Work Act to ensure that more
people can directly pursue their employer
for unpaid superannuation debts.
Recommendation 11 Noted.
The committee recommends that the The Government will consider the
Australian government consider including desirability of guaranteeing unpaid
superannuation in the Fair Entitlements superannuation entitlements in insolvency.
Guarantee payments. Further consideration of this
recommendation will include examination
of costs and benefits, including moral
hazard aspects, as well as interactions with
other measures to address superannuation
non-compliance.
The Government notes that improved
compliance by employers in meeting their
obligations is preferable to reliance on a
government guarantee to ensure that
workers receive their superannuation
entitlements.
Recommendation 12 Accepted in-principle.
The committee recommends that the The Government is supportive of keeping
Australian Taxation Office improve its individuals fully informed about their
communication with individuals to keep unpaid superannuation cases and will
them promptly and fully informed of the consider the proposals specified in this
progress and outcomes regarding their recommendation.
Superannuation Guarantee non-compliance
cases, including: The Government notes that the Australian
Taxation Office is currently reviewing how it
9
can better keep individuals informed about
• that before entering into a payment
the collection of their amounts of
plan to recover Superannuation
superannuation guarantee owing to them
Guarantee payments from a non-
within the scope of current legislation.
compliant employer, the Australian
Taxation Office be required to notify the
affected employee and gain their
consent to the course of action; and
• that in determining a reasonable
payment plan to recover
Superannuation Guarantee payments
from a non-compliant employer, the
Australian Taxation Office must give
primary consideration to the loss of
retirement savings suffered by the
employee.
Recommendation 13 Noted.
The committee recommends that the The Government is committed to ensuring
Australian Government review all current that the Australian Taxation Office and the
compliance and recovery activities related Fair Work Ombudsman are able to continue
to unpaid Superannuation Guarantee to work together to ensure that employees
contributions, including: receive all of their lawful entitlements in
their respective jurisdictions. The
• determining which cases should remain
Government notes that the Australian
with the Australian Taxation Office, and
Taxation Office and the Fair Work
which ones could be transferred to, or
Ombudsman collaborate closely in their
shared with, the Fair Work Ombudsman
compliance and recovery activities and
or an alternative body;
have a memorandum of understanding for
• directing the Fair Work Ombudsman to
the sharing of superannuation-related
begin receiving and acting on
information.
Superannuation Guarantee non-
payment complaints where
As in response to recommendation 9, the
appropriate, rather than simply
Government is committed to setting targets
referring the affected employees to the
for the Australian Taxation Office for the
Australian Taxation Office;
recovery of unpaid Superannuation
• reviewing the Superannuation
Guarantee amounts. The targets would be
Guarantee contribution regime and its
made public and reported annually. The
management by the Australian Taxation
Government will undertake further work to
Office to ascertain whether it is
determine the specific targets and will
adequately deterring underpayments
announce these in due course.
and recovering unpaid Superannuation
Guarantee entitlements; and
• improving proactive Superannuation
Guarantee initiatives including
strengthening and increasing penalties
for deliberate and repeated acts of non-
10
compliance, the inclusion of random
audits, and the publication of
enforcement activities in relation to
Superannuation Guarantee payments.
Recommendation 14 Accepted.
The committee recommends that the The Government’s commitment to include
Australian Government consider legislative superannuation in the Fair Work Act will
options to give employees, or other parties provide certain employees, and other
acting on their behalf such as unions, parties acting on their behalf, an avenue to
superannuation funds, and legal pursue unpaid superannuation through the
representatives greater standing to assist in courts, where they are not currently able to
the recovery of unpaid superannuation. do so because their awards or enterprise
agreements do not have clauses to allow
this.
Recommendation 15 Accepted in-principle.
The committee recommends that the The Government has committed to
Australian Government, as a priority: implementing the recommendations of the
Migrant Workers’ Taskforce, which include
• extend the Fair Entitlements Guarantee
extending eligibility for FEG to migrant
to all employees, including those on
workers with work rights following
temporary visas, building on
consultation regarding the benefits, costs
recommendation 13 of the Migrant
and risks, but excluding people who have
Workers' Taskforce report; and
deliberately avoided their taxation
• implement a National Labour Hire
obligations. The Government is considering
Licensing Scheme, building on
this Recommendation 15 further in the
recommendation 14 of the Migrant
context of delivering this election
Workers' Taskforce report. The National
commitment.
Labour Hire Licensing Scheme should
build on existing frameworks, such as
As part of the Government’s commitment
those schemes operating in Queensland
to implement the recommendations of the
and Victoria, to provide a nationally
Migrant Workers’ Taskforce, the
consistent framework.
Government has committed to establishing
national labour hire regulation to help
protect workers by promoting greater
compliance with workplace and other
relevant laws.
Recommendation 16 Accepted.
The committee recommends that the The Government is committed to ensuring
Australian Government explore reform to all workers, including migrant workers, are
visa laws to allow migrant workers who able to recover their unpaid wages.
11
have been exploited or underpaid to
remain in Australia until the relevant legal Consultation is ongoing with key
processes for recovery of lost wages or stakeholders to explore measures that
conditions is finalised. could be employed to support migrant
workers remain lawfully in Australia while
they seek to recover lost wages or
conditions.
Recommendation 17 Accepted in-principle.
The committee recommends that a formal, The current Assurance Protocol between
and legally binding firewall be established the Fair Work Ombudsman and the
between the Fair Work Ombudsman and Department of Home Affairs includes a
the Department of Home Affairs to protect range of safeguards and protections, and
whistle-blowers and temporary visa holders operates on the basis of informed consent
that report exploitation or wage theft to from the visa holder worker.
the Fair Work Ombudsman and extend
protection to exploitation and wage theft The Government is examining the
claims progressed through the courts. implications of establishing a firewall
between the Fair Work Ombudsman and
the Department of Home Affairs to support
migrant workers to report exploitation
without fear of adverse consequences. Any
changes to existing arrangements will seek
to extend protections for migrant workers.
Recommendation 18 Accepted.
The committee recommends that the The Government will act as a model
Australian Government act as a model procurer by exercising its procurement
procurer by ensuring that: powers in line with the Commonwealth
Procurement Framework and Rules. These
• government procurement powers are
Rules seek to ensure that the
being used to support businesses that
Commonwealth does not enter into a
engage in fair, equitable, ethical and
contract with tenderers that do not comply
sustainable practices, including
with workplace obligations.
demonstrated compliance with labour
laws; and
The Government has committed to act as a
• wage theft does not occur within its
model employer in its Secure Australian
own workforce, including in
Jobs Plan and its Plan to improve the Public
government funded sectors.
Service. The Government will work
constructively with the public service and
unions to ensure fair and equitable
conditions of employment and job security
in the public sector. This includes
12
addressing and preventing wage theft
within the public service.
Recommendation 19 Accepted in-principle.
The committee recommends that the The Government is committed to ensuring
Australian Government improve that the general protections provisions of
protections for employees who engage in the Fair Work Act continue to operate to
lawful activity to prevent wage theft, provide protections for employees who
including joining a union, pursuing engage in lawful activity to prevent wage
underpayments through established theft.
processes, publicly speaking out against
poor workplace practices, exercising The Government has committed to
workplace rights, and engaging in industrial implementing a number of measures under
activity. its Secure Australian Jobs Plan and Plan to
Build a Stronger Pacific Family, that would
increase protections for employees and
induce greater compliance with relevant
provisions. This includes legislating to make
wage theft a criminal offence (see
Recommendation 1) and incorporating a
right to superannuation within the Fair
Work Act (see Recommendation 10). Any
action available to employees under these
measures would be covered by the existing
general protections provisions.
As an outcome of the Jobs and Skills
Summit, the Government has also
announced that it will amend the Fair Work
Act to provide stronger protections for
workers against discrimination, harassment
and adverse action. The Government will
consider how these protections can be
strengthened and may consult further on
the issue in due course.
13
