Australian Government response to the
Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade References Committee
report:
Australia’s sanctions regime
JUNE 2026
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the opportunity to respond to the report of the Senate
Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade (the Committee) on its inquiry
into Australia’s sanctions regime (the Report).
The Government is taking action to ensure Australia’s sanctions regime is strong, effective,
and responsive to situations of international concern.
As part of the 2024–25 Budget, the Government committed $26.4 million to significantly
strengthen sanctions enforcement - including establishing a dedicated monitoring capability
and enhancing compliance functions within the Australian Sanctions Office. This investment
materially improves Australia’s capacity to detect non‑compliance and uphold the credibility
of our sanctions regime.
As threats to international security and agreed rules, norms and standards have grown, so too
has Australia’s use of autonomous sanctions. Since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in 2022, the
number of listings under Australia’s autonomous sanctions framework has increased
substantially. Over the past 12 months, the Government has expanded sanctions listings to a
range of individuals and entities for acts of global terrorism, human rights abuse and
cybercrime in response to evolving threats. On 6 December 2025, the Government also
established a world-first autonomous sanctions framework for Afghanistan, as part of our
ongoing efforts to hold the Taliban to account. The framework enables Australia to directly
impose its own sanctions and travel bans to increase pressure on the Taliban, targeting the
oppression of the Afghan people, particularly women, girls, and minority groups, as well as
actions that undermine the rule of law and good governance in Afghanistan.
Our sanctions listings and the legislative framework that supports them are subject to regular
and rigorous review to optimise their effectiveness and integrity. The Government uses
sanctions judiciously, where it is in our national interest, and in concert with international
partners where it is appropriate. Decisions to impose sanctions are made on a case-by-case
basis.
The Government thanks the Committee for its work in preparing the report, including
considering the 45 submissions and evidence provided during the public hearing.
Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider its application of
thematic sanctions and explore ways to further strengthen consistency where appropriate.
Response: Agreed
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
Consistent with longstanding Australian Government policy, the Government does not
speculate on potential future sanctions measures.
Sanctions are just one of the tools available to the Government to respond to situations of
international concern, and careful consideration must be given as to whether sanctions are the
most appropriate and effective measure in each circumstance. For example, in the human
rights context, other foreign policy measures such as bilateral representations, advocacy on
human rights in multilateral or other forums, including the United Nations General Assembly
and the Human Rights Council, development assistance and humanitarian support may be
more effective at a particular time.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that, in circumstances where foreign policy objectives allow,
the Australian Government, while continuing to make its own judgments concerning the
imposition of sanctions, prioritise the alignment of sanctions with allies to maximise
effectiveness and place greater emphasis on imposing such sanctions promptly.
Response: Agreed
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
Consistent with longstanding Australian Government policy, the Government does not
speculate on potential future sanctions measures.
A decision to impose sanctions is carefully considered on a case-by-case basis against the
legal requirements of Australian sanctions laws, and in accordance with Australia’s national
interest. The Foreign Minister may impose sanctions when satisfied that the listing criteria are
met, and after careful consideration that sanctions are the most appropriate action for
Australia to respond to the situation of international concern.
The Government regularly engages with international partners when considering the
imposition of autonomous sanctions, noting sanctions are often most effective when applied
in concert with others. For example, in late 2023 and 2024 Australia joined partners in
targeting Hamas financial networks and facilitators after the October 7 attacks; in 2024
Australia joined countries including the UK, Canada, New Zealand and the US in imposing
targeted financial sanctions and travel bans on Israeli settlers and extremist groups linked to
violence in the West Bank; a substantial proportion of our sanctions on Russian individuals
and entities are coordinated with partners; and we coordinated with partners to enact
sanctions following human rights abuses in Iran after the death of Mahsa Amini.
However there may be times when it is not possible or appropriate to impose the same
sanction or at the same time as international partners. Legal frameworks, legal criteria and
thresholds, national interests and the range of diplomatic measures available among countries
may differ.
The Government also considers the impact of potential sanctions on Australia, and the
Australian Sanctions Office within the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade engages
other agencies on these considerations.
In taking a decision to impose sanctions, where appropriate the Government does, and will
continue to, consider carefully actions taken by partner countries.
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider establishing a
mechanism for engagement with civil society on Australia’s sanctions regime.
Response: Agreed
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Australian Government engages regularly with civil society and other stakeholders
through ad hoc, formal and informal outreach, and targeted engagement, in-person, virtually
and by correspondence.
These activities are complemented by the Government’s publication of both guidance and
advisory notes, and responses to direct inquiries and submissions.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with its global partners
to increase focus on sanctions enforcement and close loopholes which allow Iran and
Russia to evade the financial impact of Australian sanctions.
Response: Agreed in-principle
The Government agrees in-principle to this recommendation.
The Government is committed to strengthening monitoring and enforcement of Australia’s
sanctions framework. In the 2024-25 Budget the Government provided $26.4 million over
four years from 2024-25 (and $6.6 million per year ongoing) towards this work. A key
element of this is working across agencies, and with international partners to strengthen the
impact and effectiveness of sanctions, and to identify and respond to sanctions breaches and
evasion, including by Iran and Russia.
Amendments to the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act enacted
in December 2024 and the new Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing
Rules 2025, will also reinforce sanctions implementation in Australia. Under the reforms,
AUSTRAC-regulated businesses will have new obligations to prevent sanctions
contraventions, namely to:
• establish whether their customers (and specific associated persons) are designated for
targeted financial sanctions as part of on-boarding and throughout the business
relationship, and
• develop, maintain and comply with policies, procedures, systems and controls to
ensure that the business does not contravene targeted financial sanctions.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government continue to impose sanctions
on Iranian officials involved in serious violations or serious abuses of human rights,
including wrongful detention.
Response: Agreed in-principle
The Government agrees in-principle to this recommendation.
The Albanese Government has taken stronger action against Iran than any previous
Australian government. We bolstered our autonomous sanctions framework to enable us to
target more Iranian individuals and entities involved in oppression inside Iran, including
against women and girls.
Since the violent crackdown on protests following the death of Mahsa Amini in September
2022, the Government has taken unprecedented action to hold Iranian officials and entities to
account, including imposing sanctions on more than 50 individuals and entities for their
involvement in serious violations or serious abuses of human rights in Iran. This represents a
substantial strengthening of Australia’s response to Iran’s human rights abuses under the
autonomous sanctions regime.
Consistent with long-standing Australian Government policy, the Government does not
speculate on potential future sanctions measures.
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government prioritise, in consultation
with international partners and non-governmental Australian stakeholders, the
development of methodologies to target and measure the effectiveness of Australia’s
sanctions regime.
Response: Agreed in-principle
The Government agrees in-principle to this recommendation.
The Government continues to engage with like-minded partners and the regulated community
on the impact of sanctions, and ways to strengthen their effectiveness. Sanctions vary in their
objectives, context and the expected timescale of their impact, which are important
considerations in the development of methodologies to measure their effectiveness.
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider how to identify and
locate all Russian and Iranian Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps-associated assets in
Australia which are currently subject to sanctions.
Response: Agreed in-principle
The Government agrees in-principle to this recommendation.
Under Australian sanctions laws it is an offence to use or deal with an asset, or allow or
facilitate another person to use or deal with an asset, that is owned or controlled by a
designated person or entity. That is, the assets must be ‘frozen’. The Australian Sanctions
Office provides guidance material in relation to the assets of sanctioned persons or entities
and undertakes targeted outreach. In addition, the Australian Sanctions Office undertakes
regular checks to identify assets held by significant financial institutions.
The Department continues to improve and expand its monitoring function to identify assets of
designated persons and entities that are in Australia that are required to be ‘frozen’ under
Australian sanctions laws, as well as its outreach function to assist the regulated community
to identify and report these assets as required under Australian sanctions laws.
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government identify all Russian assets in
Australia that are subject to sanctions, and consider what legislative and other changes are
required to enable the transfer of these assets.
Response: Agreed in-principle
The Government agrees in-principle to this recommendation and refers to its response to
Recommendation 7.
The Government keeps the autonomous sanctions framework under regular review to ensure
it remains fit for purpose and serves the national interest. The Australian Sanctions Office has
established an inter-agency working group to consider this issue further.
