Australian Government response to the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security
report:
Review of the Exposure Draft Legislation: Combatting
Antisemitism, Hate and Extremism Bill 2026
MAY 2026
1
Introduction
The Australian Government thanks the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and
Security for its review of the exposure draft of the Combatting Antisemitism, Hate and
Extremism Bill 2026.
There is no place in Australia for hatred or discrimination of any kind, and the Government
unequivocally condemns this behaviour. Everyone has a right to feel safe and be proud of
who they are, regardless of their religious, ethnic or cultural background. This legislative
package forms part of the Government's efforts to address the spread of hatred and extremism
and is critical to the Government's response to the devastating terrorist attack at Bondi Beach
on 14 December 2025.
The Combatting Antisemitism, Hate and Extremism (Criminal and Migration Laws) Bill and
the Combatting Antisemitism, Hate and Extremism (Firearms and Customs Laws) Bill 2026
were introduced to the Parliament on 20 January 2026. Both Bills passed the Parliament on
20 January 2026.
These reforms send a clear message that hate and violence has no place in Australia. The
Government thanks the Committee for its consideration and recommendations.
2
Recommendations
Recommendation 1: The Committee urges the Parliament to work together in a
constructive and collaborative manner across all parties and crossbench members to
ensure that the legislative response to antisemitism, hate and extremism is effective,
proportionate and reflects a unified national commitment to community safety and
social cohesion.
Response: The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
The Government’s priority is to keep our community safe and united. The Government is
committed to continuing to work with the Parliament in a constructive and collaborative
manner to respond to antisemitism, hate and extremism.
Recommendation 2: The Committee understands the Government’s intent in bringing
forward one draft Bill to deal with all elements of its response to the Bondi attack.
Noting the Government’s decision not to proceed with the racial vilification provisions
at this time, the Committee makes no recommendation in relation to that aspect of the
Exposure Draft legislation.
Consistent with the remaining elements of the Exposure Draft legislation, the
Committee recommends that (1) the hate crimes and migration provisions, and (2) the
firearms reforms, proceed.
Given the importance of the hate crime, migration and firearms provisions to
addressing antisemitism, hate and extremism, the Committee recommends that these
measures be passed.
Response: The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Combatting Antisemitism, Hate and Extremism (Criminal and Migration Laws) Act 2026
and Combatting Antisemitism, Hate and Extremism (Firearms and Customs Laws) Act 2026
were passed by the Parliament on 20 January 2026.
Recommendation 3: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in
implementing the provisions contained in Schedule 4 of the Exposure Draft legislation,
including negotiations with States and Territories around the national gun buyback,
ensure:
• the avoidance of duplication, inconsistency and unintended enforcement
outcomes;
• that farming, rural and sporting shooters are not unreasonably disadvantaged in
their businesses, lawful pursuits or national and international sporting
competition; and
• that clear guidance is provided to affected persons regarding new provisions and
arrangements, and the requirements for compliance
Response: The Australian Government agrees-in-principle to the recommendation.
The Department of Home Affairs will provide clear guidance to importers and individuals
impacted by changes to the Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations 1956 made by the
Combatting Antisemitism, Hate and Extremism (Firearms and Customs Laws) Act 2026.
3
Legislation governing firearms use and possession is the responsibility of state and territory
governments. However, the Australian Government will work closely with states and
territories on communicating national reforms, if agreed, and support a national information
campaign on the proposed National Gun Buyback Scheme.
Recommendation 4: The Committee recommends that the [relevant] Bill be amended to
include a specific defence for individuals who hold a valid licence permitting them to
manufacture, repair, maintain or modify firearms, ensuring that possession or access to
firearms- or explosives-manufacture material is not criminalised where the material
relates to conduct lawfully authorised under that licence.
Response: The Australian Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Combatting Antisemitism, Hate and Extremism (Firearms and Customs Laws) Act 2026
includes a specific defence, for the offences relating to firearms and explosives manufacture
material, which provides that the offences do not apply to individuals who hold a valid
licence that authorises them to manufacture, repair, maintain or modify firearms, firearm
accessories, firearm parts, firearm magazines or explosives or other lethal devices (see
subsection 474.45J(2)). This ensures that dealing with material that relates to conduct which
is lawfully authorised under the licence is not criminalised.
Coalition additional recommendations
Recommendation: Coalition members recommend that the Government work
constructively with the Coalition on a revised legislative package that is clearly drafted
and operationally workable and directed to the practical objective of preventing
extremist intimidation and violence and ensuring Jewish Australians can live, worship
and gather in safety.
Response: The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Combatting Antisemitism, Hate and Extremism (Criminal and Migration Laws) Act 2026
and Combatting Antisemitism, Hate and Extremism (Firearms and Customs Laws) Act 2026
were passed by the Parliament on 20 January 2026.
Recommendation: Coalition members further recommend that any legislation enacted
include a requirement for review by this Committee two years after commencement, to
assess effectiveness, enforceability, unintended consequences, and whether further
amendments are required.
Response: The Australian Government agrees-in-part to this recommendation.
The Combatting Antisemitism, Hate and Extremism (Criminal and Migration Laws) Act 2026
(the Act) includes a requirement for the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and
Security to review the operation, effectiveness and implications of the amendments made by
Parts 1 and 4, of Schedule 1, of that Act, as soon as practicable after the second anniversary
of the Act’s commencement.
The Act also includes a requirement for the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and
Constitutional Affairs to begin a review of Subdivision CA of Division 80 of Part 5.1 of the
4
Criminal Code Act 1995 as soon as practicable after the second anniversary of the Act’s
commencement.
5
