OFFICIAL
Australian Government response to the Senate Finance and Public Administration
References Committee report:
Inquiry into the operation and appropriateness of the superannuation and pension schemes
for current and former members of the Australian Defence Force (ADF)
26 June 2026
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Introduction
The national superannuation arrangements are provided to preserve savings to deliver
income for a dignified retirement, alongside government support, in an equitable and
sustainable way. The ADF superannuation and pension schemes are designed to provide
commensurate arrangements for ADF personnel, with special consideration to the unique
nature of military service.
The superannuation and pension schemes for current and former ADF members are set out
by legislative instruments. As noted by the Committee, there have been five ADF
superannuation and pension schemes since 1948. The date a member joined the Permanent
Forces, or continuous full time service, determines their superannuation scheme:
Defence Forces Retirement Benefits (DFRB) – commenced in 1948 and closed to new
o
members on 30 September 1972.
Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits (DFRDB) – opened in 1972 and closed to
o
new members on 30 September 1991. DFRDB is a defined benefit superannuation
scheme, meaning that final benefits are calculated based on a legislative formula at the
time a member separates from the ADF.
Military Superannuation and Benefits Scheme (MSBS) – opened on 1 October 1991 and
o
closed to new members on 1 July 2016. MSBS is a hybrid superannuation scheme, which
means it is a part accumulation and part defined benefit fund.
Australian Defence Force Superannuation (ADF Super) – is an available choice fund for
o
members who join the ADF from 1 July 2016. ADF Super is an accumulation scheme. ADF
personnel who joined from 1 July 2016 can elect any eligible choice fund.
Australian Defence Force Cover (ADF Cover) – commenced on 1 July 2016. ADF Cover is a
o
defined benefit pension scheme that provides death and invalidity cover for personnel
under the age of 60. Irrespective of a member’s choice of superannuation fund, all
members who joined the ADF after 1 July 2016 are covered by this scheme for death and
invalidity benefits up to the age of 60.
The Government notes that ADF superannuation schemes have evolved over time in
recognition of the unique nature of military service, as well as changing social and economic
conditions. The closure of individual schemes and the subsequent introduction of new
superannuation arrangements were decisions of government, informed by recommendations
from independent reviews. Successive ADF superannuation schemes were introduced to
contemporise the superannuation offering, or to address structural limitations or deficiencies
in earlier schemes that could not be adequately resolved through legislative amendment.
The fundamental design of the ADF superannuation schemes has been preserved to ensure
the protection of accrued and promised retirement benefits, a longstanding practice and
treatment that is consistent with other statutory defined benefit superannuation schemes.
From time to time, minor legislative amendments have been made to address administrative
or technical matters and to ensure ongoing compliance with relevant Commonwealth
legislative requirements.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
The operation and day-to-day administration of the ADF superannuation schemes is the
responsibility of Commonwealth Superannuation Corporation (CSC), while the policy
responsibility rests with Defence. Defence and CSC maintain a strong collaborative working
relationship focussed on providing quality, empathetic and consistent support to ADF
members, veterans and their families.
The Committee made four recommendations. Through a submission of additional comments,
a further 10 recommendations were made by Senator Jacqui Lambie. The Government has
prepared a formal response to both the Committee’s four recommendations and
Senator Lambie’s additional 10 recommendations.
The Government thanks the Committee for its work on this Inquiry, as well as those who
provided submissions and appeared at the hearing.
Recommendations
Recommendation 1
2.98 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider whether the
current settings of Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefit (DFRDB) pensions are fair
and equitable for all members.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The settings of DFRDB pensions, including the use of static life expectancy tables and the
permanency of a commutation election, have been reviewed on several occasions. This
included an independent Commonwealth Ombudsman review in December 2019, the
Investigation into the administration of the Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits
(DFRDB) scheme. The Ombudsman observed that any changes made to the law governing
DFRDB would have a potential unfair impact on those members who have already made an
election. This observation was also made by the Senate Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade
(FADT) References Committee in an inquiry into the accuracy of information provided to
DFRDB members, in July 2021.
The Government notes that the Committee concurred with the Ombudsman and FADT
Committee conclusion, that changes to the DFRDB scheme would potentially create other
unfair outcomes for those who did not commute or only partially commuted.
The Government notes that the DFRDB pension settings have not changed since the
Commonwealth Ombudsman completed his 2019 report and is satisfied that the scheme is
operating as intended.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 2
3.35 The Committee recommends the Australian Government consider reviewing indexation
methodology for all defined benefit military pension schemes, with a view to achieving
consistency and equity.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
Defined benefit scheme design generally considers the benefits as a whole, while pension
indexation is one component of the benefit design, the value of the pension itself,
including service based benefit multiple and final salary or final average salary, are an
important consideration. Changing one component of the benefit design without
consideration of the overall basis and level of benefits provided would be inconsistent with
the intentions of the scheme when the design was initially set.
The Government notes that the indexation methodology applying to defined benefit
military pension schemes broadly aligns with the indexation standard applied nationally.
The principal exception is the DFRDB and DFRB schemes, where from 1 July 2014, a
different indexation methodology applied for members over the age of 55.
Both DFRDB and DFRB are closed, unfunded defined benefit schemes, not subject to the
superannuation regulatory regime, and reflect the unique conditions of historical military
service, which includes early compulsory retirement ages and limited benefit payment
options. The Defence Force Retirement Benefits Legislation Amendment (Fair Indexation)
Act 2014 amended the indexation methodology for the DFRDB and DFRB schemes to more
closely align with Age Pension indexation arrangements. This was a discrete and targeted
amendment, deliberately limited to these two schemes in recognition of their special
characteristics.
The Government considers that the 2014 Fair Indexation Bill delivered a reasonable,
proportionate and carefully scoped reform, and is satisfied that these arrangements
appropriately recognise the distinct nature of the DFRDB and DFRB schemes. Accordingly,
the Government does not consider that these arrangements should be extended to other
military schemes, including the MSBS and ADF Cover, which should continue to closely
align with national indexation arrangements.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 3
4.123 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider whether
current definitions are adequate, particularly those of 'spouse' and 'mutually dependent', to
accommodate couples living apart due to experience of PTSD, other service-related mental
illnesses, and domestic and family violence.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Government agrees to review the current definitions that determine eligibility for
reversionary spouse benefits under the ADF defined benefit schemes, having regard to
their alignment with broader Government superannuation arrangements for death
benefits, and to ensure that relevant terminology is clear and easily interpreted.
The Government notes that Defence remains committed to preventing and responding to
family and domestic violence through the Defence Strategy for Preventing and Responding
to Family and Domestic Violence 2023–2028 and the associated Action Plan released in
December 2024. These initiatives set out practical measures to improve safety, support
and system-wide responses for Defence members and their families.
As part of this commitment, Defence is working to strengthen its understanding and
response to systems abuse, which can include misuse of organisational processes to
further control or harm others. This work is being informed by both lived experience and
recommendations from inquiries such as the Royal Commission into Defence and Veteran
Suicide, which recognised the strong link between family and domestic violence and
broader wellbeing risks, including suicidality.
Recommendation 4
4.127 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider allowing
Military Superannuation and Benefits Scheme members to roll over their Employee Benefit
to another superannuation fund of their choice.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
The MSBS employee benefit is portable and the Government notes that portability of the
employee benefit is an important feature of the MSBS and agrees that the extant
provisions are fit for purpose.
The Government agrees to ensure that clear information around portability of MSBS
employee benefits is available to members so they can easily understand their options.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Additional Recommendations from Senator Jacqui Lambie
Recommendation 1
1.17 The Australian Government undertake a targeted review of the commutation provisions
contained in the Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Act 1973 to rectify the
deficiencies and ensure it aligns with the messaging provided to service personnel at the
time of its introduction.
Response:
The Government disagrees with this recommendation.
This recommendation is substantively addressed under Committee Recommendation 1
and accordingly refers to its response to that recommendation.
Recommendation 2
1.18 Where evidence demonstrates that defective administration materially influenced
retirement decisions resulting in financial detriment, the Australian Government provide
appropriate remedial actions for affected DFRDB members, including Act of Grace payments
or other compensation measures.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government notes there is a current mechanism under the Compensation for
Detriment caused by Defective Administration (CDDA) Scheme where DFRDB complainants
have access to this particular service.
The Government notes that following a recommendation from the Senate Foreign Affairs
and Defence Trade References Committee in their 2021 inquiry, Defence implemented a
more tailored approach for DFRDB CDDA claims. This increased assistance in navigating the
claim process and addressed particular issues raised during the Inquiry.
Recommendation 3
1.23 The Australian Government update the life expectancy tables relied on by the Defence
Force Retirement and Death Benefits Act 1973.
Response:
The Government disagrees with this recommendation.
This recommendation is substantively addressed under Committee Recommendation 1
and accordingly refers to its response to that recommendation.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 4
1.29 The Australian Government commission an independent review of military pension
indexation arrangements to determine if reliance on Consumer Price Index-based indexation
remains appropriate and whether alternative benchmarks, such as wage growth measures,
should be utilised instead to ensure equitable retirement outcomes.
Response:
The Government disagrees with this recommendation.
This recommendation is substantively addressed under Committee Recommendation 2
and accordingly refers to its response to that recommendation.
Recommendation 5
1.34 The Australian Government implement a coordinated whole of government education
and awareness strategy to provide former and current ADF members with accessible
information about military superannuation and pension arrangements.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government notes that defined benefit schemes can be complex, particularly where
they interact with non-superannuation benefits available to veterans and their families.
The Government notes that Defence has made significant changes and improvements to
support veterans through their transition from the ADF, and there is ongoing work to build
on these changes through implementing recommendations of the Royal Commission into
Defence and Veteran Suicide.
The new Veteran and Family Wellbeing Agency is set to open on 1 July 2026 and will
expand on current services. The agency will support serving ADF personnel, veterans and
their families to prepare for transition to civilian life and navigate the veteran support
ecosystem. The agency will provide alternate referral pathways for ex-serving members
that support the integration between Defence, the Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA)
and third party providers such as CSC.
The Government notes that Defence also supports improved financial literacy through
tailored education and resources provided by the ADF Financial Services Consumer Centre
(www.adfconsumer.gov.au), with a focus on encouraging personnel to understand their
overall financial wellbeing, of which superannuation is one component.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 6
1.35 The Australian Government should strengthen coordination between the Department
of Defence, the Department of Veterans' Affairs and the Commonwealth Superannuation
Corporation to ensure that information provided to members is consistent, accessible and
easy to understand.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Government acknowledges the importance of strengthened coordination between
Defence, DVA and CSC to ensure information provided to members is consistent,
accessible and easy to understand.
The Veteran Transition Action Plan sets out the actions that key Australian Government
agencies aim to achieve to improve transition outcomes. The plan includes a range of
priorities and success factors including financial wellbeing actions across key agencies.
The Government notes there is ongoing work between Defence, DVA and CSC, including
implementing the recommendations of the Royal Commission into Defence and Veteran
Suicide.
Recommendation 7
1.36 The Department of Defence provide professional financial advice to all ADF members at
key career points such as recruitment, mid-career service and transition to civilian life to
ensure an accurate understanding of applicable military superannuation or pension
schemes.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government acknowledges that there are key milestones throughout an individual’s
career at which important financial decisions are required, and that ADF members should
be equipped to make those decisions.
The Government notes that Defence provides a financial benefit to support ADF personnel
to access independent financial advice, within 24 months of the date of transition. This
benefit is designed to reduce the cost of obtaining advice and in turn ensure that
professional financial advice is accessible for eligible ADF personnel.
The Government notes that Defence also supports improved financial literacy through
tailored education and resources provided by the ADF Financial Services Consumer Centre
(www.adfconsumer.gov.au), with a focus on encouraging personnel to understand their
overall financial wellbeing, of which superannuation is one component.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 8
The Australian Government review section 37 of the Defence Force Retirement and Death
Benefits Act 1973 for relevance and necessity, with the aim of ensuring all applications are
referred to the Commonwealth Superannuation Corporation for independent assessment,
without requiring the opinion of the Chief of the Defence Force.
Response:
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government agrees to review section 37 of the Defence Force Retirement and Death
Benefits Act 1973, with an aim to streamline the retrospective invalidity application
process for DFRDB members.
With a view to improving consistency across the ADF superannuation schemes, and
timeliness of claims processing, the Government will expand the review of section 37 of
the DFRDB Act to include section 51(6) of the Defence Forces Retirement Benefits Act 1948.
Recommendation 9
1.48 The Australian Government revise reversionary pension arrangements across military
superannuation and pension schemes to ensure that surviving spouses and dependants
retain eligibility when they are living apart from a member due to illness or safety concerns.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government notes that this recommendation is substantively addressed under
Committee Recommendation 3 and accordingly refers to its response to that
recommendation.
Recommendation 10
1.51 The Australian Government provide sufficient resourcing for the Commonwealth
Superannuation Corporation to ensure its claim management team is appropriately staffed
to process claims in a timely manner, consistent with the needs of serving and former ADF
members.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government notes Defence and CSC will continue to work together on prioritising
resources to improve claims processing times and the overall standard of service provided
to veterans, consistent with the needs of serving and former serving ADF members.
OFFICIAL
