Australian Government response to the
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee report:
Inquiry into the adequacy and efficacy of Australia’s anti-money
laundering and counter-terrorism financing (AML/CTF) regime
APRIL 2023
Introduction
On 23 June 2021, the Senate referred the adequacy and efficacy of Australia’s anti-money
laundering and counter-terrorism financing regime (AML/CTF regime) to the Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee for inquiry and report.
The inquiry examined the following:
a. the extent to which the Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre:
i. responds to and relies upon reporting by designated services, and
ii. identifies emerging problems based on this reporting;
b. the extent to which Australia’s AML/CTF regulatory arrangements could be
strengthened to:
i. address governance and risk-management weaknesses within designated
services, and
ii. identify weaknesses before systemic or large-scale AML/CTF breaches occur;
c. the effectiveness of the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing
Act 2006 (AML/CTF Act) to prevent money laundering outside the banking sector;
d. the attractiveness of Australia as a destination for proceeds of foreign crime and
corruption, including evidence of such proceeds in the Australian real estate and
other markets since the enactment of the AML/CTF Act;
e. Australia’s compliance with the Financial Action Task Force (FATF)
recommendations and the Commonwealth Government’s response to:
i. applicable recommendations in applicable FATF reports, and
ii. the April 2016 Report on the statutory review of the AML/CTF Act and
associated rules and regulations;
f. the extent to which adherence with FATF recommendations prevents systemic and
reputational risks to Australia, the Australian economy, and Australia’s capacity to
access international capital;
g. the regulatory impact, costs and benefits of extending AML/CTF reporting
obligations to designated non-financial businesses and professions (DNFBPs or
‘gatekeeper professions’), often referred to as ‘Tranche 2’ legislation;
h. the extent to which:
i. DNFBPs take account of money laundering and terrorism financing risks, and
ii. the existing professional obligations on DNFBPs are compatible with
AML/CTF reporting obligations; and
i. any other related matter.
The Committee’s Final Report was tabled on 30 March 2022. The Government has agreed to
the Committee’s four bipartisan recommendations, and thanks the Committee for its work on
this important topic. The Government’s response to the Committee’s recommendations is
provided below.
Recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Commonwealth Government accelerates its consultation
with stakeholders on the timely implementation of tranche 2 reforms in line with the FATF
recommendations and ensures that the AUSTRAC and the Department of Home Affairs have
the right resources to adequately and effectively implement and manage the tranche 2
regime.
Response:
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government is committed to protecting the integrity of the Australian financial system and
continually improving Australia’s anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism financing
(AML/CTF) laws. This includes extending the AML/CTF regime to tranche 2 entities,
including lawyers, accountants, trust and company service providers, real estate agents and
dealers in precious metals and precious stones.
Globally, tranche 2 entities are recognised as vulnerable to misuse and exploitation by
transnational, serious and organised crime groups to disguise and launder criminal wealth. In
recognition of these risks the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), the global money
laundering and terrorist financing regulator, requires that these sectors be subject to the
AML/CTF regime. As a founding member of the FATF, Australia is strongly committed to
implementing the international FATF standards. Failure to regulate tranche 2 sectors means we
are increasingly falling behind other member states.
In Australia, money laundering poses a serious, significant and growing threat to our national
security. Criminal wealth directly threatens Australia’s security and prosperity by distorting
and exploiting financial markets and legitimate economic activity. The professional services
sector is critical in establishing the structures required to evade detection, hide ownership of
assets, facilitate the movement of funds and generate wealth for criminal groups. Law
enforcement agencies are aware that facilitators use their specialist skills and knowledge,
wittingly and unwittingly, to establish complex corporate and trust structures used to launder
illicit wealth.
Failure to regulate tranche 2 entities leaves a significant gap in Australia’s AML/CTF
intelligence picture, limiting the ability of our law enforcement agencies to respond. The
regulatory gaps that enable money laundering to take place undetected also risk damage to the
economy through market distortion and the use of unfair competitive advantages to diminish
the prosperity of legitimate businesses. Such distortion also compromises Australia’s
international reputation as a destination for foreign investment and business.
The Government will shortly commence consultation with affected sectors in relation to
tranche 2 reforms. The AML/CTF regime represents a significant partnership between
Government and industry, and close consultation with these stakeholders will ensure that an
appropriate balance can be reached between mitigating the risk of money laundering and
terrorist financing and the regulatory impact on industry.
The Government will continue to consider resourcing arrangements for AUSTRAC and the
Attorney-General’s Department, which assumed policy responsibility for Australia’s
AML/CTF regime from 1 July 2022, to ensure that they have the appropriate resources to carry
out their functions.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that the Commonwealth Government’s acceleration of its
consultation with relevant stakeholders be broad, with specific consideration given (but not
be limited) to:
- the impact of regulatory burden on small business;
- opportunities and efficiencies that might be gained from technological innovation,
especially where it could streamline regulatory processes and lower costs; and
- existing regulatory and professional obligations on tranche 2 entities, including their
effectiveness against the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act
2006.
Response:
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government will shortly commence consultation with affected sectors in relation to
tranche 2 reforms. Broad consultation and consideration of the frameworks and regulatory
obligations to which entities are currently subjected will be critical to ensure that an appropriate
balance is reached between mitigating the risk of money laundering and terrorist financing and
the regulatory burden on industry.
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the Commonwealth Government seeks advice as to whether
section 242 of the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006
should be amended to ensure the proper operation of legal professional privilege.
Response:
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government is strongly committed to ensuring the proper operation of legal professional
privilege. The Government will soon commence consultations with the legal sector in relation
to the potential expansion of the regime. Close consultation with the legal sector will be critical
in ensuring an appropriate approach to limiting the impact on legal professional privilege while
mitigating the risk of money laundering and terrorism financing.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that the Commonwealth Government pursues a beneficial
ownership register.
Response:
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government has committed to implementing a public registry of beneficial ownership,
consistent with Recommendation 4 of the Committee’s report.
A beneficial ownership information register will increase transparency and accountability
around the ownership and control of companies operating in Australia. A stronger beneficial
ownership regime will assist regulators and law enforcement agencies in addressing tax
evasion, money laundering and other financial crime concealed through complex legal
structures and arrangements.
The Government released a consultation paper on 7 November 2022 detailing proposed design
elements of a first phase of the beneficial ownership register policy, focusing on certain unlisted
entities regulated under the Corporations Act 2001. Consultation closed on 16 December 2022,
and the Government is currently considering stakeholder submissions.
