Australian Government response
to the final report of the
Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 1
Contents
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay
Review .................................................................................................................... 1
Glossary of terms ................................................................................................. 3
Introduction ......................................................................................................... 4
Response to recommendations ............................................................................. 6
Recommendation 1: Further review in 2 to 3 years ............................................... 6
Recommendation 2: National Construction Industry Forum ................................. 7
Recommendation 3: National Construction Industry Forum – model tripartite
forum ............................................................................................................... 8
Recommendation 4: New registered organisations enforcement options .............. 9
Recommendation 5: Employee representatives’ requests to initiate bargaining .. 10
Recommendation 6: Variation of multi-employer agreements ............................ 11
Recommendation 7: Industrial action ............................................................... 12
Recommendation 8: Statement of Principles on Genuine Agreement ................. 13
Recommendation 9: Statement of Principles on Genuine Agreement – stakeholder
engagement ................................................................................................... 14
Recommendation 10: Work value and equal remuneration cases ....................... 15
Recommendation 11: Support for work value proceedings ................................. 16
Recommendation 12: Government funding positions ........................................ 17
Recommendation 13: Wage-setting practices ................................................... 18
Recommendation 14: Annual Wage Review Expert Panel ................................... 19
Recommendation 15: Care and Community Sector Expert Panel ........................ 20
Recommendation 16: Protected attributes in the Fair Work Act 2009 .................. 21
Recommendation 17: Fixed term contracts – variations to modern awards ......... 22
Recommendation 18: Fixed term contracts – further consultation ...................... 23
Recommendation 19: Small claims procedure .................................................. 24
Recommendation 20: Job advertisements ........................................................ 26
Recommendation 21: Entry to assist Health and Safety Representatives ............ 27
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 2
Glossary of terms
Australian Building and Construction Commission (ABCC) – the regulator of the
commercial building and construction industry - abolished by the Fair Work Legislation
Amendment (Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act) 2022.
Equal Remuneration Order (ERO) – an order made by the Fair Work Commission that
ensures there will be equal remuneration for men and women workers for work of equal
or comparable value.
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009 – Commonwealth legislation
regulating the registration of unions and employer associations.
Fair Work Act 2009 – the key piece of Commonwealth legislation regulating the
employee and employer relationship in Australia.
Fair Work Commission – Australia’s national workplace relations tribunal and
registered organisations regulator.
Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act) 2022 – the first
tranche of the government’s workplace relations reforms, which received Royal Assent
on 6 December 2022.
Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes) 2023 – further amendments
to workplace relations laws, which received Royal Assent on 14 December 2023.
Fair Work Ombudsman – Australia’s national workplace relations regulator.
Health and Safety Representative – employees who are elected by their colleagues to
deal with work health and safety issues in the workplace.
National Construction Industry Forum – a statutory advisory body, comprising
representatives of government, employers and employee representatives, which
provide advice to government in relation to work in the building and construction
industry.
Protected Action Ballot Order – an order made by the Fair Work Commission that
approves employees to hold a protected action ballot.
Registered Organisations Commission – the regulator of registered organisations,
abolished by the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act.
Right of entry – the right for union officials who hold an entry permit to lawfully enter a
workplace under certain conditions.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 3
Introduction
In its first term, the Australian Government introduced significant reforms to the Fair
Work Act 2009 (Fair Work Act), giving effect to the commitment to improve job security
and encourage wage growth for Australians through the workplace relations system.
The first major tranche of reforms to workplace relations laws was the Fair Work
Legislation (Secure Jobs, Better Pay) Act 2022 (Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act), which
received Royal Assent on 6 December 2022 and included measures to:
• reinvigorate the bargaining system to drive wage growth and better support
vulnerable employees
• support job security to benefit both employees and employers, and improve
gender equality, including by reducing the gender pay gap
• introduce more stringent compliance and enforcement rules, particularly in
relation to small claims and job advertisements
• ensure conditions, wages and rights at work are protected, and
• abolish the Registered Organisations Commission (ROC) and Australian Building
and Construction Commission (ABCC) and transfer responsibility to the Fair
Work Ombudsman (FWO) and Fair Work Commission (FWC).
The Fair Work Legislation (Closing Loopholes) Act 2023 (Closing Loopholes Act)
received Royal Assent on 14 December 2023. Part 16A of Schedule 1 of the Closing
Loopholes Act amended the Fair Work Act to allow officials of registered organisations,
who do not hold a right of entry permit, to enter workplaces to assist health and safety
representatives (HSRs). This change gave effect to Recommendation 8 of the 2018
independent review of the Model Work Health and Safety Laws.
The Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act required the Minister for Employment and Workplace
Relations to cause a review to be conducted of the operation of its amendments,
to begin within 2 years of receiving Royal Assent. The Closing Loopholes Act required
a review of Part 16A of Schedule 1 to start within 9 months of the change coming
into effect.
On 10 September 2024, the Minister combined the two reviews and requested a final
report be delivered to government by 31 March 2025.
The Minister appointed a review panel to conduct the review in October 2024 in
accordance with the Terms of Reference. The Terms of Reference, updated on
1 November 2024, is available on the Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations’ website.1 The review panel consisted of:
1 Department of Employment and Workplace Relations (DEWR), Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review – Terms
of Reference, DEWR website, 4 November 2024, accessed 17 October 2025.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 4
• Emeritus Professor Mark Bray: an industrial relations academic who served as
the Foundation Chair in Employment Studies at the University of Newcastle from
1997 until early 2021. He is also an honorary professor at both RMIT University
and University of Sydney.
• Professor Alison Preston: a Professor of Economics in the Business School
at the University of Western Australia, who holds a PhD in labour economics
and industrial relations and teaches in the areas of micro-economics and
public policy.
The review panel conducted an extensive two-stage consultation process with
stakeholders to inform its final report, including receiving a total of 88 written
submissions and holding roundtable discussions with employer groups, unions
and academics.2
The review panel delivered its final report to government on 31 March 2025 and the
report was tabled in Parliament on 14 August 2025.
The final report found the reforms are operating effectively with minimal unintended
consequences overall and made 21 recommendations:
• Five recommendations are for minor or technical amendments to the
Fair Work Act.
• Nine recommendations are for other government action, mainly in the form of
further consultation, consideration and/or monitoring by the relevant department.
• The remaining 7 recommendations are directed to other bodies, including the
FWC, FWO, National Construction Industry Forum (NCIF) and other stakeholders.
The primary recommendation of the final report is for the government to undertake a
further review of the operation of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act in 2 to 3 years’ time, so
that it is informed by additional data and further evidence. 3 The final report noted that
limited time has elapsed since the reforms began and there was a lack of data available
to the review panel to assess the impact of the Act.
The government acknowledges the overall finding of the report that the reforms are
operating effectively and with minimal unintended consequences. The government
supports 13 of the final report’s recommendations and supports in principle the
remaining 8 recommendations, as outlined below.
2 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 446-451.
3 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 9.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 5
Response to recommendations
Recommendation 1: Further review in 2 to 3 years
The Australian Government should undertake a further review into the operation of
the Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Secure Jobs, Better Pay) Act 2022 in 2 to 3
years. The government should consult with stakeholders to determine the most
appropriate timeframe, research and data requirements, and terms of reference for
a further review.
The government supports this recommendation.
The review panel acknowledged that the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act required a review
within 2 years of the amendments taking effect. However, it noted that this timeframe
limited the availability of data to inform the review.
Despite these limitations, the review panel found the reforms were broadly achieving
the government’s intent and were operating appropriately, effectively and with minimal
unintended consequences.
The reforms introduced many changes to the workplace relations landscape. It may
take time for their full impact to emerge – particularly through successive enterprise
bargaining cycles and modern award variations and as stakeholders test the new
provisions through the FWC and courts.
The government supports the review panel’s recommendation for a further review in
2 to 3 years’ time.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 6
Recommendation 2: National Construction Industry Forum
The National Construction Industry Forum should continue its work developing and
implementing the Building and Construction Industry sector Blueprint to bring
cultural change to the industry.
The government supports this recommendation.
The NCIF was established as a key commitment following the 2022 Jobs and Skills
Summit, seeking to encourage cooperation and drive long-term cultural change in the
building and construction industry.4
As a statutory advisory body, the NCIF provides advice to government on a broad range
of issues, including safety, skills and training, productivity, culture, diversity and gender
equity. It offers industry participants further opportunities to engage with government
and have their views heard.
The review panel found that, while the NCIF was still in its ‘infancy’5, its efforts to drive
cultural change were encouraging. The review panel also noted that the NCIF’s
tripartite structure has been central to its success in fostering cooperation, identifying
issues and providing informed advice to government.
On 22 September 2025, the NCIF unanimously endorsed the Blueprint for the Future
(Blueprint) which outlines 44 recommendations to build a construction industry that
works for everyone.6 Implementation has commenced, starting with 9 priority
recommendations. NCIF members expect to publish a forward workplan by early 2026,
setting out timeframes and key phases for developing advice to government.
Members also agreed to begin meeting in facilitated workshops to shape a Joint
Construction Industry Charter. Broader industry engagement and collaboration will be
explored as part of that process.
The government will continue to support the NCIF in its role as an advisory body.
To strengthen its work and support implementation of the Blueprint, the government
has committed an additional $2.1 million over 4 years from 2025-26 and $0.6 million
per year ongoing. The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations has also
established a new team that will work across government and industry to support
these outcomes.
4 DEWR, Terms of Reference for the National Construction Industry Forum, DEWR website, n.d.,
accessed 17 October 2025.
5 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 51.
6 DEWR, National Construction Industry Forum Meeting Communiqué – 22 September 2025, DEWR
website, n.d., accessed 17 October 2025.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 7
Recommendation 3: National Construction Industry Forum – model
tripartite forum
The Australian Government should consider utilising the National Construction
Industry Forum as a model tripartite forum to advise the Australian Government on
other industries.
The government supports this recommendation.
The Review identified the tripartite approach of the NCIF as central to fostering
cooperation, understanding key issues and providing advice to government on the
construction sector. The membership of the NCIF provides for equal representation by
employee and employer/contractor representatives.
From its first meeting in October 2023, the NCIF has demonstrated the value of
tripartism – bringing together key representatives of government, employers and
workers to collaborate productively on the challenges and priorities facing the building
and construction industry.7
The government recognises the value of tripartism in developing robust policy and
fostering consensus. Good faith dialogue in workplace relations reform remains a key
government priority.
The government will consider opportunities to apply NCIF-like forums in other
industries or settings where appropriate.
7 DEWR, National Construction Industry Forum Meeting Communiqué – 20 October 2023, DEWR website,
n.d., accessed 17 October 2025.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 8
Recommendation 4: New registered organisations enforcement options
The Australian Government should consult, including with the General Manager of
the Fair Work Commission, to consider whether penalty amounts payable under
infringement notices are proportionate to the contraventions that are subject to an
infringement notice under the Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009.
The government supports this recommendation.
The Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act abolished the ROC, transferring its functions and
powers to the General Manager of the FWC. This reform streamlined regulation by
establishing the FWC as a single body responsible for registered organisations.
The amendments introduced two new enforcement options under the Fair Work
(Registered Organisations) Act 2009 – infringement notices and enforceable
undertakings. These powers expanded the General Manager’s capacity to respond to
non-compliance by registered organisations and are similar to powers available to
other regulators.
The review panel found that the General Manager’s power to issue enforceable
undertakings was operating as intended. However, it noted the infringement notice
power was not being used effectively.8 The review panel identified the scale of penalties
was a likely barrier, noting the penalty amount for many contraventions occurring after
7 November 2024 is $19,800 per contravention.
The government acknowledges the review panel’s concerns about the penalty amounts
and the limited use of infringement notices. The government will consult stakeholders
about the appropriateness of the penalty amounts and consider options to implement
this recommendation.
8 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 69.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 9
Recommendation 5: Employee representatives’ requests to
initiate bargaining
The Fair Work Commission should publish guidance and education materials to
assist employers and bargaining representatives of employees to understand their
obligations in relation to a request to bargain under s 173(2A) of the Fair Work Act
2009 (Cth).
The government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act reinvigorated the enterprise bargaining framework,
enabling more employers and employees to access the benefits of bargaining. A key
amendment allows employee bargaining representatives to initiate bargaining for a
proposed single-enterprise agreement if it replaces an agreement that nominally
expired within the past 5 years and will have substantially similar coverage. This change
removed the requirement to obtain a majority support determination in such cases.
The review panel found that the amendments were operating as intended, noting that
the initiating bargaining provisions had been used in a small number of agreements at
that time.9 However, it recommended that further guidance and education material is
published to help employers and employee bargaining representatives to understand
their obligations.
The Secure Jobs, Better Pay reforms included a commitment of $7.9 million over four
years to support the FWC in assisting employers and employees to participate in
enterprise bargaining and agreement-making.10 Since the reforms were introduced,
the FWC has allocated additional resources and launched significant initiatives to
achieve this.11
The government supports in principle this recommendation, acknowledging the
independence of the FWC in its implementation.
9 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 103-104.
10 DEWR, Secure Jobs, Better Pay: Small business factsheet, DEWR website, n.d., accessed 17 October
2025.
11 Fair Work Commission (FWC), President’s statement on implementing government reforms and our
performance, FWC website, 2 August 2023, accessed 17 October 2025.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 10
Recommendation 6: Variation of multi-employer agreements
The Fair Work Act should be amended to rectify the technical issue with
undertakings identified by the Fair Work Commission in Application by Nest
Employee Services Pty Ltd T/A Nido Early School [2025] FWCA 282.
The government supports this recommendation.
The Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act introduced the supported bargaining stream to replace
the low-paid bargaining stream. This reform sought to reduce barriers for employers
and employees who need support to access bargaining and replace it with a more
flexible and accessible system, with assistance from the FWC throughout the process.
The first multi-enterprise agreement made under the supported bargaining stream was
approved on 10 December 2024.12 At approval, it covered 60 employers and 12,000
employees in the early childhood education and care sector. Since then, the FWC
has approved variations to add new employers and employees to the agreement.
As of 30 January 2026, the agreement covers around 523 employers and more than
45,800 employees.
In its first decision to vary the agreement, the FWC noted it could not accept an
undertaking from an employer as part of the variation process under the current
supported bargaining provisions.13 The review panel identified this as a minor technical
issue and an unintended consequence of the amendments.14
The government supports resolving this issue to ensure undertakings can be accepted
by the FWC when adding employers and employees to a supported bargaining
agreement. The government will consider options to rectify the issue.
12 Application by United Workers’ Union [2024] FWCFB 455.
13 Application by Nest Employee Services Pty Ltd T/A Nido Early School [2025] FWCA 282 at 48
14 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 121.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 11
Recommendation 7: Industrial action
The mandatory conference in s 448A of the Fair Work Act should be amended to
provide the Fair Work Commission with the discretion not to conduct a conference if
there is agreement of relevant bargaining representatives.
The government supports this recommendation.
The Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act introduced a mandatory step in the FWC’s process for
protected action ballot orders (PABOs). When issuing a PABO for a proposed enterprise
agreement, the FWC must also order the bargaining representatives to attend a
conference for mediation or conciliation.
Further amendments made by the Closing Loopholes Act clarified that this requirement
applies only to the bargaining representatives who applied for the PABO, and to an
employer and their bargaining representatives that seek to take subsequent protected
employer response action. If the applicant fails to attend a conference, in breach of a
FWC order, they cannot meet the requirements for protected industrial action.
This amendment aimed to improve the efficiency of PABO applications and help
‘de-escalate’ bargaining disputes before industrial action occurs.
The review panel considered that while there is merit in the mandatory conference
requirement, the conference may have limited value in some cases – particularly where
parties are in agreement that there is no utility in convening a conference.15
The government supports providing the FWC with discretion not to conduct a
conference in such circumstances. This recommendation aligns with the government’s
policy to improve the bargaining process and promote cooperation between bargaining
parties. The government will consider options to implement this recommendation.
15 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 155.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 12
Recommendation 8: Statement of Principles on Genuine Agreement
The Australian Government should amend the Fair Work Act to ensure the Statement
of Principles on Genuine Agreement is a more complete statement of the procedural
matters the Fair Work Commission must consider in relation to whether a proposed
enterprise agreement has been genuinely agreed.
The government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act simplified the enterprise agreement approval process
while maintaining appropriate employee protections, including by replacing overly
prescriptive and complex pre-approval steps in the Fair Work Act with one broad
requirement that an enterprise agreement has been genuinely agreed to by employees.
These amendments also included a requirement that the FWC publish a ‘statement of
principles’, which provides guidance to employers about how they can ensure
employees have genuinely agreed to an agreement and is considered by the FWC when
determining whether to approve an enterprise agreement.
The statement of principles, published on 12 May 2023, deals with some of the pre-
approval steps that were previously contained in the Fair Work Act. 16 However, the
requirement that employers must take all reasonable steps to explain the terms of a
proposed enterprise agreement to employees (‘explanation requirement’) was retained
in the Fair Work Act. The review panel noted this created complexity for stakeholders,
which it recommended is addressed.17
The first reading of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act in the House of Representatives on
27 October 2022 included transferring the explanation requirement to the statement of
principles, along with the other pre-approval steps. However, following consultation,
the government amended the bill so that the Fair Work Act still requires employers to
clearly explain enterprise agreements to all employees, including those who are young,
from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds, and those without a bargaining
representative.18
The government agrees with the goal of simplicity and clarity the recommendation is
seeking and supports it in principle. Any changes require stakeholder consultation to
ensure that the aim of simplification while maintaining appropriate protections is met.
A future review of the reforms may provide an opportunity to consider this issue further.
16 FWC, Making of the Statement of principles on genuine agreement, FWC website, n.d., accessed on 17
October 2025.
17 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 163.
18 Senate Education and Employment Legislation Committee, Parliament of Australia, Fair Work
Legislation Amendment (Secure Jobs, Better Pay) Bill 2022 [Provisions] (Report, November 2022), 54.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 13
Recommendation 9: Statement of Principles on Genuine Agreement –
stakeholder engagement
The Fair Work Commission should regularly engage with its Enterprise Agreements
and Bargaining Advisory Group to consider and advise on the operation of the
Statement of Principles on Genuine Agreement to ensure it is operating
appropriately and effectively.
The government supports in principle this recommendation.
In May 2023, the FWC established the Enterprise Agreements and Bargaining Advisory
Group to provide feedback and advice on the Secure Jobs, Better Pay enterprise
bargaining reforms.19 The group includes representatives from peak bodies and other
stakeholders affected by the reforms and has become one of the FWC’s primary
consultative forums on enterprise bargaining and agreements.20
The review panel recommended that the FWC further engage with this group to
investigate and advise on the issues related to the Statement of Principles on Genuine
Agreement (‘Statement’).21 It noted that such engagement should focus on identifying
key issues, should the FWC undertake a review of the Statement.
The government supports this recommendation in principle, recognising the value of
stakeholder engagement in ensuring the workplace relations system operates
effectively. However, the government acknowledges the FWC’s independence in
determining how to respond to the recommendation.
19 FWC, Implementing the new bargaining provisions, accessed 17 October 2025.
20 FWC, Fair Work Commission response to the Bargaining Discovery Research Report, FWC website, 9
August 2024, accessed 17 October 2025.
21 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 163.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 14
Recommendation 10: Work value and equal remuneration cases
The review panel encourages the Fair Work Commission to continue its program of
work to advance gender equality, particularly by addressing the low pay in other
female-dominated sectors (beyond care work), and to set out broader principles for
identifying and addressing work value and gender undervaluation.
The government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act placed gender equality at the centre of the Australian
workplace relations system to reduce the gender pay gap and improve job security and
wages for all employees. This significantly enhanced the FWC’s capacity to advance
gender equality in the exercise of its powers under the Fair Work Act.
The amendments support the FWC to order wage increases to address unequal pay and
undervalued work. They do this by clarifying that a male comparator is not required, the
FWC’s consideration of work value must be free of gender-based assumptions, and the
FWC must consider whether work has been historically undervalued due to gender-
based assumptions.
The review panel found that the work value amendments are, so far, having their
intended effect to advance gender equality. While the FWC has already made important
work value determinations in the aged care industry, the review panel noted that its
ability to make EROs under the new provisions had not yet been substantially tested.22
The review panel also observed that, although FWC’s current gender-based
undervaluation – priority awards review focusses on the care sector, its gender pay
equity research suggests future work will extend beyond care-related occupations.
The government is supportive of the FWC continuing this important function to address
gender undervaluation and reduce the gender pay gap across all industries and sectors.
The government notes the FWC has commenced the degree-qualified professional
classifications review to remedy potential undervaluation across a wide range of
industries, including those outside the care-sector, on work value grounds.
The government supports in principle this recommendation, while acknowledging the
FWC’s independence in determining how to respond to it.
22 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 228.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 15
Recommendation 11: Support for work value proceedings
The Fair Work Commission should continue to support parties and facilitate
proceedings to address gender undervaluation, including through undertaking
research and gathering evidence to support future work value proceedings.
The government supports in principle this recommendation.
The review panel recognised the public value of major work value cases in addressing
gender undervaluation and reducing the gender pay gap. It considered that this
warrants broader support for parties who participate in these cases.23
As the review panel noted, work value cases may require the FWC to identify evidence
gaps, gather and analyse relevant information and establish principles to guide future
proceedings, which places a significant burden on participating parties. The review
panel recommended that the FWC continue to undertake the bulk of research and
evidence collection to reduce this burden.
To support the implementation of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act, the government
committed $20.2 million over the forward estimates in the October 2022-23 Budget to
establish 2 new Expert Panels within the FWC.24 These panels were set up to hear wage-
related matters and address low pay and poor conditions in the care and community
sectors. This includes a dedicated research unit to support FWC members with the
evidence needed to hear complex wage matters.
The government acknowledges the FWC’s recent efforts, including gender pay equity
research that has informed ongoing gender-based undervaluation – priority awards
review proceedings. The government is supportive of the FWC continuing this
important work.
The government supports in principle this recommendation, while acknowledging the
FWC’s independence in determining how to respond to it and the FWC’s powers to
manage proceedings and inform itself.
23 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 229.
24 DEWR, Establishing two new expert panels in the Fair Work Commission, DEWR website, n.d.,
accessed 17 October 2025.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 16
Recommendation 12: Government funding positions
The Australian Government should take steps to advise the Fair Work Commission
and stakeholders of its position on funding for the outcomes of Fair Work
Commission reviews to address gender undervaluation at the earliest opportunities.
The government supports this recommendation.
The review panel noted that the government’s position on funding wage increases
may influence the FWC’s consideration of when and how to address gender
undervaluation.25
The government supports this recommendation and will continue considering funding
decisions arising from FWC reviews on a case-by-case basis. The government
acknowledges it is an important stakeholder in FWC proceedings, including because of
its role in funding key sectors. The government is also mindful of the importance of
action to address the gender pay gap and budget discipline.
The government maintains a strong track record of constructive engagement with the
FWC and has committed to work positively with the FWC to address its findings of
gender undervaluation in key female-dominated awards through the gender
undervaluation – priority awards review. The government participated in the
proceedings, noting the complexity of assessing direct and indirect impacts across a
broad range of government programs and services. The government’s submissions
have highlighted the importance of wage increases being implemented in a measured
and responsible manner that manages workforce, fiscal and macro-economic risks.
25 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 229.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 17
Recommendation 13: Wage-setting practices
The Australian Government should actively monitor wage-setting practices,
especially in enterprise agreements, to ensure that modern award outcomes lead to
sustained improvements in gender pay equity.
The government supports this recommendation.
The government's reforms put gender equality at the centre of the workplace relations
system in order to reduce the gender pay gap, including through reinvigorating the
bargaining framework. Addressing gender undervaluation in modern awards plays an
important role in correcting the wage-setting environment and establishing a new ‘floor’
from which employers and employees can bargain.
The review panel acknowledged that these changes will influence other wage-setting
practices, such as future rounds of enterprise bargaining.26 However, it raised concerns
that higher base rates in modern awards could inadvertently lead to poorer bargaining
outcomes in historically low-paid sectors – particularly if the new award rate meets or
exceeds the previously bargained above-award base rate in an enterprise agreement to
become the minimum pay rate and future bargaining does not deliver comparable
above-award increases.
The government supports this recommendation. The Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations actively monitors and advises on the operation of the workplace
relations system. The department will continue to monitor wage-setting practices,
particularly in enterprise agreements, to ensure modern award outcomes are leading to
sustained improvements in gender pay equity.
26 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 229.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 18
Recommendation 14: Annual Wage Review Expert Panel
The Australian Government should amend the Fair Work Act at s 620(1)(b) to include
gender pay equity as an additional area of expertise when appointing Expert Panel
Members to the Annual Wage Review Expert Panel.
The government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act strengthened the FWC’s ability to advance gender
equality. This included establishing 2 new Expert Panels—one for Pay Equity and one
for the Care and Community Sector—as part of the government’s commitment to place
gender equality at the centre of the workplace relations system.
The review panel found that amendments relating to the Expert Panels are generally
operating as intended. However, it recommended including ‘gender pay equity’ as an
additional area of expertise when appointing members to the Annual Wage Review
Expert Panel.27 Under the Fair Work Act, an Expert Panel must include 3 Expert Panel
Members with knowledge or experience in one or more areas of expertise including
workplace relations, economics, social policy and/or business, industry or commerce.
The review panel considered that adding ‘gender pay equity’ would be an appropriate
step to ensure the reforms continue to advance gender equality.
The government supports the aim of this recommendation to ensure gender equity is
accounted for in Annual Wage Review decisions and supports the recommendation in
principle. Expanding the criteria for membership of the Expert Panel would require
further consultation and consideration before being agreed to.
27 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 236.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 19
Recommendation 15: Care and Community Sector Expert Panel
The Fair Work Act should be amended to provide the Fair Work Commission
President with greater discretion in determining when a Care and Community Sector
Expert Panel is required.
The government supports in principle this recommendation.
The care and community sector plays a vital role in supporting vulnerable Australians
and is a significant female-dominated sector in the Australian labour market. In
recognition of this, the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act included amendments to establish
the Pay Equity and Care and Community Sector (CCS) Expert Panels in the FWC to hear
wage related matters and help address low wages and challenging workplace
conditions faced in the care and community sector.
Under the arrangements, the President of the FWC must convene a CCS Expert Panel
for any matters that may relate to the sector. The review panel found this requirement
unnecessarily burdensome and an unintended consequence of the Secure Jobs,
Better Pay reforms.28
The government supports this recommendation in principle, recognising the
importance of enabling the FWC to operate efficiently. The government will consult
stakeholders on whether the President should be conferred greater discretion to
determine when a CCS Expert Panel is needed and consider implementation options
as appropriate.
28 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 236.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 20
Recommendation 16: Protected attributes in the Fair Work Act 2009
The Australian Government should undertake further research and consider whether
it is appropriate to extend the protected attributes in the Fair Work Act to explicitly
cover perimenopause and menopause.
The government supports in principle this recommendation.
The review panel found that the strengthened anti-discrimination protections and
special measure amendments to the Fair Work Act were working as intended.
The review panel also highlighted emerging evidence of women’s negative workplace
experiences during perimenopause and menopause. In this context, further research
was recommended.
The government supports this recommendation in principle. The Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations has an ongoing role maintaining a database of
approved enterprise agreements and monitoring how they deal with menopause,
including clauses like reproductive leave. These issues are also being considered by the
House of Representative Standing Committee on Employment Workplace Relations,
Skills and Training’s inquiry into the National Employment Standards, which is currently
ongoing.
The department will also continue to monitor and review relevant menopause and
perimenopause related research as it arises and engaging with key stakeholders in
this area.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 21
Recommendation 17: Fixed term contracts – variations to modern awards
Stakeholders should seek variations to modern awards to tailor the limitation on the
use of fixed term contracts to their industry or occupation.
The government supports this recommendation.
The Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act amended the Fair Work Act to limit on the use of fixed
term contracts to improve job security. The limits mean that contracts for the same
role cannot exceed 2 years (including renewals) or 2 consecutive contracts, whichever
is shorter.
If these limits are breached, the contract remains valid except for the clause specifying
its expiry date, meaning the employee becomes a permanent or casual employee
depending on the nature of their engagement. The provisions aim to prevent misuse of
fixed term contacts, enhance job security, reduce precarious employment and support
fair working conditions.
Exceptions to the limitation are set out under the Fair Work Act. Temporary targeted
exceptions are also provided by the Fair Work Regulations 2009 (Regulations).
The review panel noted limited evidence to assess the impacts of the reforms but found
that stakeholder concerns about the complexity of exceptions and extensions to the
temporary exceptions in the Regulations may be undermining their effectiveness.29
The review panel recommended that stakeholders collaborate to resolve issues with
the broader framework.30 Where agreement cannot be reached, stakeholders should
seek resolution through FWC, including by varying modern awards. The review panel
cited the FWC’s recent review of fixed term contract provisions in higher education
awards, commenced on its own initiative, as an example of how existing mechanisms
can be used effectively.31
The government supports this recommendation, consistent with its view that the
modern awards exception is intended to recognise sector-specific arrangements and
allow stakeholders to use the modern awards framework to address issues before the
independent FWC. The government notes implementation is a matter for stakeholders
to pursue through award variation processes before the FWC.
29 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 267.
30 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 268.
31 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 267.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 22
Recommendation 18: Fixed term contracts – further consultation
The Australian Government should undertake a short, final period of consultation to
identify targeted improvements to the limitation on fixed term contracts to address
issues which cannot currently be resolved through modern awards and make the
limitation more readily applicable in practice.
The government supports this recommendation.
The review panel acknowledged that further work is needed to resolve outstanding
issues with the fixed term contract framework but urged parties to ‘draw a line in the
sand’ and move towards a final resolution.32
The review panel considered that further consultation may be warranted, particularly
where variations to modern awards do not address concerns about the limitation on
fixed term contracts. However, the review panel recommended that any additional
consultation is brief and conclusive, noting the extensive engagement already
undertaken by the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations.
The government supports this recommendation and agrees there is value in further
targeted consultation. The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations is
consulting stakeholders and will advise government on the need for targeted
improvements to the fixed term contract framework to support implementation.
32 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 267.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 23
Recommendation 19: Small claims procedure
Consistent with recommendations 9 and 10 of the Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations’ Review of the Fair Work Act Small Claims Procedure:
9. The Government should undertake further work to consider whether
additional funding is required for legal assistance in small claims matters, to
enable:
a. the establishment of duty lawyer services
b. the provision of targeted community legal education initiatives, and
c. legal assistance providers to assist and represent more workers.
10. Once data on the effects of the increased monetary cap becomes
available, the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations should
consider whether any additional changes to the small claims procedure
under the Fair Work Act 2009 are necessary.
The government supports in principle this recommendation.
The government has committed $3.9 billion over 5 years under the National Access to
Justice Partnership 2025-2030 (NAJP), which commenced on 1 July 2025. The NAJP
supports front-line service delivery across the legal assistance sector. Legal assistance
providers are to prioritise services in line with Commonwealth priorities under the NAJP.
Clause 16(c) identifies that employment matters are a Commonwealth priority in
‘alleviating cost of living pressures’.33 Importantly, the government has committed
ongoing funding beyond the 5-year term of the NAJP, providing much-needed funding
certainty to the sector.
Part 24 of Schedule 1 to the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act amended the Fair Work Act
small claims procedure to assist workers in recovering their unpaid work entitlements
and reduce the cost of proceedings. The amendments:
• increased the cap on the amount that can be awarded through small claims
court proceedings from $20,000 to $100,000. This was intended to make the
small claims procedure available to a greater number of workers
• clarified the courts’ ability to award filing fees as costs to successful small
claims applicants. This was intended to reduce the deterrent effect of filing
fees on the making of claims.
33 Federal Financial Relations, National Access to Justice Partnership Agreement, 6.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 24
These reforms support the government’s commitment to improve compliance with, and
enforcement of, the Fair Work Act. The review panel found the provisions were working
as intended, while acknowledging data limitations.
The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations will consider whether further
changes to the Fair Work Act’s small claims procedure are required as more data
becomes available on the impact of these amendments to assist workers in recovering
their unpaid work entitlements and reduce the cost of proceedings.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 25
Recommendation 20: Job advertisements
The Fair Work Ombudsman should engage with job advertising platforms and other
technology stakeholders to ensure that all job advertisements include accurate and
lawful information, supported by the Fair Work Ombudsman’s public education
initiatives and materials.
The government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Secure Jobs, Better Pay Act amended the Fair Work Act to make it unlawful to
advertise a job with a pay rate below the legal minimum. While underpayment is
already prohibited, these changes seek to further reduce exploitation and prevent
unintentional underpayments.
The review panel found early evidence that the amendments are achieving their
intended effect. However, it emphasised the need for consistent and effective
application, particularly in light of evolving technologies and communication
platforms.34 Stakeholders raised concerns about job advertisements posted on private
forums such as WhatsApp groups, closed social media pages and restricted job
boards. The review panel highlighted the importance of providing support to job
advertising platforms to ensure pay ranges comply with legal requirements.
The government supports in principle this recommendation, acknowledging the
independence of the FWO.
The government understands that the FWO continues to work with stakeholders to
prevent and address unlawful job advertisements. This includes engagement with
advertising platforms, responding to reports via its Infoline and anonymous tip-offs, and
working with tripartite stakeholder groups. The FWO is also exploring digital tools to
streamline the identification and assessment of non-compliant advertisements and
enhance its surveillance and detection capabilities. These efforts complement its
education resources enforcement activities, including issuing of fines to employers
who breach the law.
34 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 296.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 26
Recommendation 21: Entry to assist Health and Safety Representatives
The Australian Government should monitor Health and Safety Representative
assistants accessing workplaces without right of entry permits and take immediate
action to address any indications of misuse, particularly in the building and
construction industry.
The government supports this recommendation.
The Closing Loopholes Act amended the Fair Work Act to allow union officials without a
right of entry permit to enter workplaces to assist HSRs. This amendment responded to
a recommendation of the 2018 independent Review of the Model Work Health and
Safety Laws and means that union officials are treated the same as any other person
entering a workplace to provide assistance to an HSR.35
The review panel noted that the changes only commenced on 15 December 2023.36 The
review panel also observed that recent issues involving the Construction, Forestry and
Maritime Employees Union have affected stakeholder trust in the workplace relations
system, particularly in relation to this amendment.
The review panel recommended that the government closely monitor and respond to
any indications that union officials, particularly those in the building and construction
industry, are misusing the provisions.
The government supports this recommendation, recognising the critical role of HSRs in
maintaining safe workplaces. The department will continue to monitor workplace
access for this purpose, with a focus on the building and construction industry, and
provide advice to government as needed.
35 M Boland, Review of the model Work Health and Safety laws: Final Report, report to Safe Work
Australia, 2020.
36 Bray and Preston, Final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review, 308.
Australian Government response to the final report of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay Review 27
