Australian Government response to the
Senate Committee Economics report:
Help to Buy Bill 2023 and the Help to Buy (Consequential
Provisions) Bill 2023
July 2026

Introduction
The Help to Buy Act 2024 (the Act) and the Help to Buy (Consequential Provisions) Act 2024 will
support 40,000 low- and middle-income Australian households over four years to purchase their own
home.
The Act provides for Housing Australia to implement the Australian Government Help to Buy Scheme
(the Scheme), which is a shared equity scheme designed to support Australians to achieve home
ownership. The Act provides a legislative framework for the Scheme and addresses the functioning of
the referrals of power from the States under section 51(xxxvii) of the Constitution. These referrals
provide the Constitutional basis for the Scheme.
The Help to Buy (Consequential Provisions) Act 2024 makes minor amendments to the Housing
Australia Act 2018 to deal with consequential matters arising from the Help to Buy Act 2024.
The Scheme’s operational details, including eligibility criteria, are contained in the Help to Buy
Program Directions 2025 (the Program Directions), a legislative instrument under Part 3 of the Act.
The Government undertook public consultation on an exposure draft of the Program Directions from
23 April to 21 May 2024, and the instrument was registered on 13 June 2025.
To support the operation of the Scheme, two legislative instruments were made – the Treasury Laws
Amendment (Help to Buy Exemptions) Regulations 2025 (the Exemption Regulations) and the Help to
Buy Regulations 2026 (Merits Review Regulations). The Exemption Regulations commenced on
19 September 2025, and exempt the provision of credit by Housing Australia under a Help to Buy
arrangement from the National Credit Code, and clarify that Help to Buy arrangements are not
derivatives under the Corporations Regulations 2001. The Merits Review Regulations commenced on
20 February 2026, and specify which decisions made by Housing Australia under the Act and Program
Directions will be subject to merits review by the Administrative Review Tribunal.
The Government thanks the Senate Economics Legislation Committee for its inquiry into these acts,
and thanks those organisations and individuals who made submissions to the inquiry and participated
in the public hearing.
The Government responses to the recommendations made in the Committee’s final report are
provided below. In accordance with the guidelines, no Government responses have been provided to
the Committee’s recommendation to pass the bills and the Coalition Senators’ Dissenting Report
recommendation to not pass the bills. The Senate passed both bills on 26 November 2024.
The statutory review provisioned for in section 45 of the Help to Buy Act 2024 will provide an
additional opportunity to consider possible changes to the Scheme to ensure it achieves its objective
of supporting Australian households that would have otherwise not been able to purchase a home.
Introduction | 1
Response to the recommendations
Australian Greens Senators’ Dissenting Report
Recommendation 1
That the Bills should not be passed unless the Federal Government makes changes towards
phasing out negative gearing and the capital gains tax discount for property investors, coordinates
a national freeze and cap on increases, and increases investment in public housing.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
These proposals are beyond the scope of this legislative package. The Help to Buy Scheme will
support 40,000 low- and middle-income Australian households to achieve home ownership by
providing an equity contribution from the Government. This allows eligible Australians to buy a
home with a smaller deposit and mortgage.
The Government is reforming negative gearing and capital gains tax (CGT) arrangements to
improve the fairness of the tax system, support home ownership and help fund new tax cuts for
workers.
From 1 July 2027, the Government will limit negative gearing for residential property investments
to new builds, and replace the 50 per cent CGT discount with cost base indexation and a
30 per cent minimum tax rate on capital gains.
To maintain support for new housing supply, investors who buy new builds will be exempt from
the changes to negative gearing and be able to choose either the 50 per cent CGT discount or
indexation and the minimum tax when they sell the property. New builds are residential
properties which genuinely add to supply, such as where an existing dwelling is demolished and
replaced with a greater number of dwellings.
In addition, investors that support Government housing priorities will be exempt from the
changes to negative gearing, including build-to-rent developments and dwellings provided as
social or affordable housing. The existing 60 per cent CGT discount applying to qualifying
affordable housing will also be fully retained to preserve incentives to invest in those assets.
These changes will support more first home buyers to enter the housing market over time.
Treasury modelling suggests that the reforms will increase the owner occupier share of the
housing market, resulting in around 75,000 additional owner-occupiers over the next decade. This
is equivalent to reversing around 10 years of declines in the home ownership rate.
Recommendation 2
In order to assist all potential first-home buyers and renters, the Federal Government should
coordinate an emergency national freeze on rental increases for two years, followed by an
ongoing cap on rent increases of 2% every 2 years.
Australian Government response
The Government does not support this recommendation.
These proposals are beyond the scope of this legislative package. The Help to Buy Scheme is
intended to assist renters transition into home ownership. This will reduce the number of
Australians needing to rent and alleviate some of the pressures on the rental market.
The Government acknowledges that renters are facing significant challenges. That’s why the
Government is focused on making renting fairer, more affordable and more secure, including by
strengthening renters’ rights and improving conditions across the rental market.
Consistent with the Homes for Australia: A National Plan, the Government is working with states
and territories to deliver stronger rental protections and increase the supply of rental and
affordable housing to support long-term affordability.
The Government is increasing the supply of new rental housing, including social and affordable
housing, through Build to Rent tax concessions, the National Housing Accord and the Housing
Australia Future Fund.
The regulation of residential tenancies, including rental agreements and pricing, is the
responsibility of state and territory governments. On 16 August 2023, National Cabinet agreed to
‘A Better Deal for Renters’, which includes developing a nationally consistent policy to require
genuine reasonable grounds for eviction, moving towards limiting rental increases to once a year
and phasing in minimum rental standards.
To improve rental affordability in the short term, the Government has made multiple increases to
maximum rates of Commonwealth Rent Assistance (CRA). In the 2024–25 Budget, the
Government increased the maximum rates of CRA by 10 per cent, building on the 15 per cent
increase in September 2023. These were the first back-to-back increases in more than 30 years.
The maximum rates for CRA have increased by over 50 per cent since March 2022 (including
indexation). In 2026–27 the Government expects to spend around $7.4 billion to assist around
1.4 million households.
Recommendation 3
Given the current shortfall in public and social housing, the government should directly invest
billions of dollars into building public housing, commensurate with the shortfall.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
This proposal is beyond the scope of this legislative package.
The Government is committed to growing the social and affordable housing sector as part of a
coordinated national effort to rebuild Australia’s housing system.
Through Homes for Australia: A National Plan, the Government is delivering a sustained pipeline
of social and affordable homes and supporting long term investment to expand supply where it is
most needed.
‑
The Government has committed to delivering 55,000 social and affordable homes between
May 2022 and the end of the decade. As of 30 April 2026, the Government has supported delivery
of over 7,000 social and affordable homes, and more than 22,800 homes are under construction
or in planning.
The Government has invested in a range of programs to further our national social and affordable
housing stock, including:
• The $10 billion Housing Australia Future Fund (HAFF), the single biggest investment to
support social and affordable rental housing in over a decade. The HAFF and the National
Housing Accord Facility (NHAF) will support 40,000 new social and affordable rental
homes, as well as a range of acute housing needs, including repair and maintenance in
remote Indigenous communities, crisis and transitional accommodation for women and
children, and housing support for Veterans who are experiencing or at risk of
homelessness.
• The National Housing Infrastructure Facility – Social and Affordable Housing stream.
• $2 billion to states and territories under the Social Housing Accelerator to deliver around
4,000 new and refurbished social homes across Australia.
• The Housing Australia Critical Infrastructure to finance critical housing enabling
infrastructure such as utilities and roads.
• An additional $1 billion under the Housing Australia Future Fund – Crisis and Transitional
for women and children experiencing family domestic violence and youth experiencing, or
at particular risk of, homelessness.
These investments are part of the Government’s Homes for Australia: A National Plan which will
support increased housing supply, strengthen the housing system and help ensure that all
Australians have access to safe, secure and affordable housing.
Recommendation 4
The Federal Government should establish a public developer to directly build 610,00 homes over
the next decade and sell and rent them for below market prices.
Australian Government response
The Government does not support this recommendation.
These proposals are beyond the scope of this legislative package.
Homes for Australia: A National Plan recognises that delivering the homes Australia needs
requires coordinated action across all levels of government and the private and non government
sectors.
‑
The Government is focused on unlocking private sector capacity, enabling infrastructure, and
planning reform to accelerate housing delivery at scale. This approach reflects the Government’s
broader plan to increase supply through a nationally coordinated housing system.
In addition to direct investment in social housing, the Government is working closely with states
and territories, to deliver more housing for Australians, including through:
• The National Housing Accord, where all levels of government and industry have
committed to an aspirational target of building 1.2 million new, well-located homes over
five years.
• The Housing Support Program, providing $3.5 billion in funding to support state, territory
and local governments to build planning capability, enable the construction of essential
enabling infrastructure, and the development of community amenities to support new
housing development.
• A new $2 billion stream of the Housing Support Program – the Local Infrastructure Fund –
which will be available to local governments and state-owned utilities to build the critical
‘last mile’ infrastructure needed to support new housing developments.
• Agreeing a National Planning Reform Blueprint with states and territories to improve
housing supply and affordability by updating strategic plans to reflect housing supply
targets, promoting medium and high-density housing in well located areas close to
existing public transport connections, amenities and employment, and streamlining
approval pathways.
• Providing tax incentives to encourage investment and construction in the build to rent
sector, helping expand Australia’s rental housing supply. Affordability standards to
support this legislation have also been implemented to help ensure the supply of
affordable tenancies and provide greater security and stability for these renters.
Senator David Pocock’s Additional Comments
Recommendation 1
Amend Section 3 of the bill as follows to better target the assistance being provided by the
Commonwealth for those who without it would be unlikely ever to enter home ownership:
• The object of this Act is to give Housing Australia the function of entering into shared
equity arrangements on behalf of the Commonwealth in relation to residential property
to enable access to home ownership for Australians otherwise unlikely to achieve this.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Help to Buy Scheme is designed to support low- and middle-income Australian households
that would otherwise not be able to purchase a home to access home ownership. The Program
Directions, which were released for public consultation between 23 April and 21 May 2024
contain eligibility criteria for the Scheme. In particular, the income caps and the financial capacity
test undertaken by Housing Australia, will help to ensure that the Scheme is effectively targeted
at Australian households that would otherwise not be able to purchase a home.
Recommendation 2
Enable the possible utilisation of the Help to Buy mechanism as a ‘mortgage rescue’ service by
making a minor amendment in Section 3 of the bill as follows:
• The object of this Act is to give Housing Australia the function of entering into shared
equity arrangements on behalf of the Commonwealth in relation to residential property
to improve housing outcomes for Australians by assisting low income and middle income
individuals to buy homes and to enable individuals facing mortgage repossession and
possible homelessness to remain in home ownership.
Australian Government response
The Government does not support this recommendation.
These proposals are beyond the scope of this legislative package. The Help to Buy Scheme is
intended to support low- and middle-income Australian households that would otherwise not be
able to purchase a home to access home ownership. The Program Directions contain details of
the Scheme, including eligibility requirements and participation requirements. These
requirements limit the suitability of the Scheme to support existing home owners facing mortgage
stress.
Recommendation 3
Amend Section 45, after subclause (1), to give consideration in the scheme’s evaluation
requirements to enabling otherwise unachievable home ownership by inserting additional text as
follows:
• (1A) Without limiting subsection (1), the review must consider the extent that the
operation of the Help to Buy program has assisted in enabling access to home ownership
for those otherwise likely to have been permanently excluded from it, as well as for those
enabled to access home ownership more quickly than likely to have been otherwise
achieved.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government does not consider it necessary to amend the Act. The Act includes a requirement
for a statutory review of the Help to Buy Scheme three years after the Act’s commencement,
which will provide a formal opportunity to assess the effectiveness of the Scheme, including how
it is supporting Australians into home ownership.
Evaluation of the Help to Buy Scheme will support evidence based policy development and inform
future decisions as part of the Government’s long term housing reform agenda.
‑
‑
Recommendation 4
Add a new clause in Section 45 to require the scheme is designed carefully to integrate with
existing first home buyer schemes as follows:
• (1B) The review must also consider the extent to which the Help to Buy program, in its
implementation, has effectively integrated with other first home buyer assistance
programs (Commonwealth, states and territories), as envisaged in the National Housing
and Homelessness Plan.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government does not consider it necessary to amend the Act. The legislated review of the
operation of the Help to Buy Scheme under section 45 of the Act is intended to involve a
comprehensive review of the operation of the Scheme. The specific focus of the review will be
informed by the experience of the operation of the Scheme over its initial period. If this
experience indicates that the interaction between the Help to Buy Scheme and other first home
buyer assistance programs requires additional consideration, it is expected that this would be
considered by the review.
Recommendation 5
Specify a floor in the legislation opening the scheme up to a minimum 30,000 eligible participants
per annum, ensuring the scheme operates in perpetuity (as opposed to exhausting after four
years) and quarantining at least one third of available places per annum for offer in the first
instance to historically disadvantaged cohorts, such as older women and First Nations peoples.
Australian Government response
The Government does not support this recommendation.
The Government’s Homes for Australia: A National Plan provides a comprehensive, long term
plan to rebuild Australia’s housing system, focusing on increasing supply and strengthening
coordination across governments. The plan aims to ensure that all Australians can access‑ safe,
secure and affordable housing.
The Help to Buy Scheme is part of the plan’s objective to assist more Australians to own a home
of their own. Any future changes to the Scheme’s scale will be considered in the context of the
Government’s broader housing agenda and overall system performance.
In addition to Help to Buy, the Government has directed significant investment to improving
housing outcomes, including through Round 3 of the Housing Australia Future Fund, which is the
largest round yet and will deliver more than 21,000 new social and affordable homes across
Australia.
The Housing Australia Future Fund supports the delivery of various acute housing programs to
deliver tailored housing support. These include:
• The Housing Australia Future Fund – Crisis and Transitional (HAFF CT) stream, which is
administered by Housing Australia is a demand driven program that provides concessional
loans and grant funding to support the delivery housing solutions to vulnerable
Australians, including women and children experiencing family and domestic violence,
and youth at risk of, or experiencing, homelessness. The program was previously known
as the National Housing Infrastructure Facility (NHIF CT).
An additional $100 million has also been dedicated to additional crisis and
o
transitional housing, under the Crisis and Transitional Accommodation Program
(CTAP) for women and children experiencing family and domestic violence, and
older women at risk of homelessness. This five-year capital works program funds
the building, remodelling, or purchase of new or expanded accommodation.
• Investing $175.1 million through the Safe Places Emergency Accommodation Program
(Safe Places) to deliver emergency accommodation. The program provides capital works
grants to support the renovation, construction, or purchase of crisis or emergency
accommodation for women and children experiencing family and domestic violence.
• The Veterans’ Acute Housing Program provides $30 million for crisis and transitional
housing and specialist services for veterans and their families experiencing, or at risk of,
homelessness. The program is administered by the Department of Veterans’ Affairs.
• $200 million over 5 years from 2024-2025 from the HAFF for the repairs, maintenance
and improvements of housing in remote Indigenous communities in Western Australia,
South Australia, Queensland and the Northern Territory.
• Round 3 of the HAFF includes a dedicated First Nations funding stream to improve First
Nations housing outcomes. The stream includes:
$600 million in dedicated, long-term funding and access to additional
o
concessional loans for projects delivered by or in genuine partnership with First
Nations housing organisations;
a 10% First Nations tenancy target across all social housing delivered under HAFF
o
Round 3;
a new First Nations concierge function within Housing Australia to support
o
organisations through the application and delivery process, and help build the
long-term capacity of the First Nations housing sector; and
updates to the Housing Australia Investment Mandate to embed Closing the Gap
o
priorities.
The Government is also investing $2 billion over 10-years from 2024-25, matched by the Northern
Territory (NT) Government, to deliver up to 2,700 houses and property tenancy management
activities, aiming to halve overcrowding and improve housing outcomes for First Nations people
living in the remote NT. $220 million from 2022 to 2027 is further invested to support the delivery
of urgent repairs and upgrades to housing and essential infrastructure on NT Homelands.
