Australian Government response to the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and
Financial Services report:
Corporate insolvency in Australia
August 2026

Introduction
On 28 September 2022, the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services
(Committee) commenced its inquiry into corporate insolvency in Australia. The Committee examined
the effectiveness of Australia’s corporate insolvency laws in protecting and maximising value for the
benefit of all interested parties and the economy. The Committee presented its final report to the
Senate on 12 July 2023 and subsequently tabled it in the House of Representatives on 1 August 2023.
The Albanese Government welcomes the report and is committed to a corporate insolvency system
that facilitates a fair, orderly, transparent and predictable process for dealing with the financial affairs
of insolvent or financially distressed companies while promoting good corporate conduct and market
confidence.
The Government’s response to the Committee’s recommendations is below.
Introduction | 1
Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that as soon as practicable the government commission a
comprehensive and independent review of Australia’s insolvency law, encompassing both
corporate and personal insolvency. The committee is also recommending that the government
progress several other near-term actions as identified in the executive summary.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government has tasked the Productivity Commission with undertaking an inquiry into
Regulatory barriers to business dynamism in Australia (the PC business dynamism inquiry), which,
among other matters, will consider the impact of Australia’s corporate and personal insolvency
frameworks on business dynamism. The Government has asked the PC to have regard to previous
inquiries where relevant in conducting its inquiry.
The Government intends generally to defer consideration of the near-term actions identified by
the Committee, so that they can be considered alongside the relevant recommendations of the
PC business dynamism inquiry.
This will support the development and implementation of reforms in a holistic and coordinated
manner and minimise unnecessary regulatory change for stakeholders.
2 | Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that the comprehensive review, as part of its early work, consider
and report on the appropriate principles and objectives of insolvency law. The committee further
recommends that the government respond quickly to this first report of the comprehensive
review to allow the comprehensive review to continue with further stages of work in a timely
way.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
As part of the PC business dynamism inquiry, the Government has tasked the PC to identify and
evaluate whether the design, operation and integrity of corporate and personal insolvency
frameworks are barriers to business dynamism.
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the comprehensive review consider and make
recommendations on options to enhance public interest objectives and the effectiveness of, and
interaction between, the personal and corporate insolvency systems.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government notes that the PC may consider some or all of these matters as part of its
business dynamism inquiry.
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the Australian Securities and Investments Commission collect
high quality, granular data in relation to insolvency and provide this data in a timely way to
relevant government agencies and regulators.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government acknowledges that current data collected by the Australian Securities and
Investments Commission (ASIC) is in accordance with the law. The Government notes that the PC
may consider whether any additional powers to collect data should be made available to ASIC
through legislation to help drive better industry practices and further assist its oversight of
corporate insolvency as part of its business dynamism inquiry.
In the near term, the Government encourages ASIC to further analyse and share available data
with relevant government agencies and regulators pending completion of the PC business
dynamism inquiry. The Government will also consider opportunities for changes to ASIC’s
collection and sharing of data from regulated entities as part of its broader work to make
communications more technology-neutral and flexible.
Response to the recommendations | 3
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends that the proposed comprehensive review of insolvency consult data
holders, researchers, industry participants, and public sector organisations to progress the access
to and analysis of insolvency data.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government has directed the PC to undertake a report into barriers to business dynamism, in
which it will:
• undertake appropriate public consultation, including holding hearings, inviting submissions
and releasing an interim report to the public; and
• engage relevant stakeholders and experts, including Commonwealth, state and territory
governments, relevant statutory agencies, industry stakeholders and interested members of
the public.
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends that the proposed comprehensive review consider and report on
the current system of corporate insolvency pathways from a holistic systems analysis perspective.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government notes that the PC may consider the current system of corporate insolvency
pathways from a holistic systems analysis perspective as part of its business dynamism inquiry.
4 | Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends that the government implement recommendations from the Safe
Harbour Review, independent and likely in advance of the further review, and consider referring
the remainder of safe harbour reform issues identified in this report to a comprehensive review.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government has implemented some recommendations from the Safe Harbour Review
(Recommendations 3, 6, 8 and 9) through miscellaneous and technical amendments that clarify
the operation of the provisions and ensure they remain fit for purpose. These amendments were
enacted through the Treasury Laws Amendment (Delivering Better Financial Outcomes and Other
Measures) Act 2024, which was passed by the Parliament on 4 July 2024.
ASIC released Consultation Paper 372: Guidance insolvent trading safe harbour provisions: Update
to RG 217 on 14 September 2023. Following stakeholder consultation, ASIC published an updated
Regulatory Guide 217: Duty to prevent insolvent trading: Guide for directors on 6 December 2024.
The updated guidance sets out key principles to help directors understand and comply with their
duty to prevent insolvent trading. It also provides guidance on the use of the safe harbour
protection from liability for insolvent trading.
The Government notes that the PC may consider the remaining issues noted by the Committee as
part of its business dynamism inquiry.
The Government will consider the need for implementation of the remaining Safe Harbour Review
recommendations alongside the Government response to the PC business dynamism inquiry.
Recommendation 8
The committee recommends that as soon as practicable the government consider and consult on
potential reforms to the:
• small business restructuring pathway; and
• simplified liquidation pathway.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of ensuring that the small business restructuring and
simplified liquidation pathways are achieving their intended policy outcome of providing efficient
and effective external administration options for small businesses with simple affairs, while
reducing the risk of corporate misconduct.
As noted in the response to Recommendation 6, the Government notes that the PC may consider
these pathways as part of its business dynamism inquiry.
In addition, the Government will consider whether any targeted changes could be progressed in
parallel.
Response to the recommendations | 5
Recommendation 9
The committee recommends that the comprehensive review consider the:
• voluntary administration pathway; and
• members voluntary liquidation pathway.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation. The Government notes that the PC
may consider these pathways as part of its business dynamism inquiry.
Recommendation 10
The committee recommends that the Australian Securities and Investments Commission collect
and analyse data from an appropriately sized sample of voluntary and compulsory de-
registrations, to provide greater visibility of the solvency status of deregistered companies.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation and encourages ABRS, ASIC and ATO to collaborate
to undertake an analysis utilising information available to each agency.
Recommendation 11
The committee recommends that the comprehensive review consider the requirements for the
registration of small business restructuring practitioners to understand the reasons for the limited
number of registrations to date.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government notes that the PC may consider these matters as part of its business dynamism
inquiry.
6 | Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 12
The committee recommends that the government reform the experience eligibility requirements
for registered liquidators, to address the inequity of the requirements and the gender imbalance
in the population of registered liquidators. Reforms could potentially include:
• increasing the period over which experience is demonstrated, or
• replacing part of the required hours with a competency-based exam.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government acknowledges the importance of increasing inclusivity and improving the
representation of women in the registered liquidator profession.
Following law reform introduced in December 2020 (commencing on 1 January 2021),
committees considering registration applications were able to grant registration as a registered
liquidator where the 4,000 hours’ experience requirement had not been met but the applicant
was otherwise suitable to be registered.
ASIC released Consultation Paper 376: Registered liquidators: Registration, ongoing obligations,
disciplinary actions and insurance: Updates to RG 258 and supporting documents and templates
on 8 March 2024. Following stakeholder consultation, ASIC published an updated Regulatory
Guide 258: Registered liquidators: Registration, ongoing obligations, disciplinary actions and
insurance requirements on 3 October 2024. The updated guidance reflects legislative changes and
experiences with the regime since the regime was implemented. It provides additional guidance
on meeting the mandatory experience requirements and outlining that persons can apply where
the experience requirement is not met.
The Government encourages ASIC to continue its important work in this area.
Recommendation 13
The committee recommends that the comprehensive review include consideration of the
remuneration of insolvency practitioners, including:
• the extent to which public interest work carried out by liquidators for no or limited pay is
sustainable; and
• the impact of this on all stakeholders in external administrations.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government notes that the PC may consider these matters as part of its business dynamism
inquiry.
Response to the recommendations | 7
Recommendation 14
The committee recommends that the comprehensive review include consideration of the
operation, efficacy, and efficiency of the current independence requirements for insolvency
practitioners, including:
• whether the current requirements are achieving the policy settings that inform them and
whether these policy settings are optimal; and
• the advantages and disadvantages of formally separating the roles of advice and restructuring
from formal appointments to liquidations and administrations.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government notes that the PC may consider some or all these matters as part of its business
dynamism inquiry.
Recommendation 15
The committee recommends that the comprehensive review include consideration of the nature
and extent of the harm posed by ‘untrustworthy pre-insolvency advisors’, and whether further
regulation or enforcement measures are needed to address this issue. The committee further
recommends that in the interim, the government take prompt action to improve the regulation
and active enforcement of pre-insolvency advisers.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government notes that the PC may consider the current regulation of corporate and personal
pre-insolvency advisors, and the enforcement tools available to regulators, as part of its business
dynamism inquiry, including alongside its review of sections 1, 3 and 4 of the Treasury Laws
Amendment (Combatting Illegal Phoenixing) Act 2020.
8 | Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 16
The committee recommends that the government consider changes to the Assetless
Administration Fund to ensure that it is achieving its intended policy objectives.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government will consider changes to the Assetless Administration Fund (AAF), including its
scope and funding, following the conclusion of the PC business dynamism inquiry.
The AAF plays an important role in supporting the identification and reporting of corporate
misconduct to ASIC by registered liquidators and assisting liquidators to recover assets for the
benefit of creditors, particularly where liquidators may otherwise lack the resources to do so. The
AAF also assists employees in recovering their entitlements via the Fair Entitlements Guarantee
scheme (FEG) by winding up abandoned companies and funding liquidators to conduct the wind-
up.
ASIC plans, designs and administers the AAF grant programs in accordance with the
Commonwealth Grants Rules and Principles and directions from Government on what the grant
funds can be used for. This includes setting eligibility criteria for each grant opportunity and
determining available grant amounts. ASIC assesses applications against the published grant
opportunities.
Recommendation 17
The committee recommends that the Department of the Treasury consider assessing the
potential benefit of the Public Interest Administration Fund proposed by the Productivity
Commission in 2015, including the impacts of the required increase on the annual review fee for
company renewals; and either consider implementing the proposal, or provide that analysis to a
comprehensive review.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Public Interest Administration Fund was proposed to be established through an expansion of
the scope, and renaming of, the AAF. As the PC business dynamism inquiry may assess options for
funding the administration of assetless companies (see response to Recommendation 18 below),
including potential changes to the AAF, the Government will consider reforms in this area
informed by the PC business dynamism inquiry.
Response to the recommendations | 9
Recommendation 18
The committee recommends that the comprehensive review consider and make
recommendations on options for funding the administrations of assetless companies, including
reforms to the Assetless Administration Fund (noting the committee’s recommendation 16) and
the merits of creating a public liquidator for corporate insolvency.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government notes that the PC may consider these matters as part of its business dynamism
inquiry.
Recommendation 19
The committee recommends that the comprehensive review consider whether the current
statutory reporting obligations for insolvency practitioners are best serving the integrity,
efficiency, and efficacy of the Australian corporate insolvency framework, including (but not
limited to):
• the ability of the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (ASIC) to appropriately
process, utilise and respond to initial statutory reports on current resources; and
• the appropriateness of existing reporting thresholds, having regard to their regulatory value
as well as the burden imposed on insolvency practitioners.
The committee further recommends that in the interim, the government and ASIC consider
whether any timely changes can be made to the regulations on reporting thresholds, and ASIC’s
response to insolvency practitioner reports.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government notes that the PC may consider some or all these matters as part of its business
dynamism inquiry.
The Government considers that statutory reporting obligations for insolvency practitioners are a
key feature of the regulatory framework and an important source of information for ASIC in
identifying alleged corporate misconduct. While statutory reporting thresholds are set in
legislation, ASIC can provide additional guidance to assist liquidators in meeting their reporting
obligations.
ASIC released Consultation Paper 377: Guidance for reporting by external administrators and
controllers on 11 April 2024. Following stakeholder consultation, ASIC published an updated
Regulatory Guide 16: External Administrators and Controllers – Reporting of Possible Offences and
Misconduct on 5 September 2024. The updated guidance clarifies reporting expectations and
supports the exercise of professional judgement by insolvency practitioners.
In 2025, ASIC made a number of changes to its forms and processes to further reduce the burden
on registered liquidators and allow them greater scope to apply their professional judgement in
reporting misconduct. The Government encourages ASIC to continue its important work in this
area.
10 | Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 20
The committee recommends that the comprehensive review examine the operation of the
insolvent trading regime and its impact on the broader corporate insolvency framework.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government notes that the PC may consider these matters as part of its business dynamism
inquiry.
Recommendation 21
The committee recommends that the comprehensive review analyse and make recommendations
on the overall economic and social benefits and costs of Australian Taxation Office relief to
potentially insolvent companies in hard economic times, in the context of the impacts on the
purposes of the insolvency system.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government notes that the PC may consider these matters as part of its business dynamism
inquiry.
Recommendation 22
The committee recommends that the Australian Taxation Office consult, act on and publish model
creditor guidelines, consistent with its model litigant obligations.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation, which is directed to the ATO.
The ATO plays a unique and important dual role as the administrator of the tax and
superannuation systems and as a statutory creditor. The ATO will consult with industry on the
guidelines in due course.
Recommendation 23
The committee recommends that the comprehensive review consider the relative priority of
employees, liquidators, and secured creditors, including the priority over circulating assets under
section 561 of the Corporations Act 2001. The committee further recommends that this be a high
priority topic for the comprehensive review.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government notes that the PC may consider these matters as part of its business dynamism
inquiry.
Response to the recommendations | 11
Recommendation 24
The committee recommends that the government develop reforms to improve the framework
designed to ensure the policy objective of access to the Fair Entitlements Guarantee as a scheme
of last resort, both to prevent misuse by novel schemes of arrangement, phoenixing, and other
practices and to ensure capture of all individuals with valid entitlements.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
FEG is intended to operate as a scheme of last resort, where no alternative avenue exists for
eligible employees to be paid their employee entitlements due to the insolvency of their
employer. To protect the integrity of FEG, the Government is considering reforms to address
potential misuse of FEG that could be implemented independent of the PC business dynamism
inquiry, following public consultation in early 2025.
The Government’s Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes) Act 2023 has improved
the protection of the redundancy entitlements of persons employed by small business employers
in insolvency contexts, including supporting fair outcomes for claimants under FEG.
Recommendation 25
The committee recommends that the comprehensive review consider and report on franchising
insolvency issues.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government notes that the PC may consider these matters as part of its business dynamism
inquiry.
Recommendation 26
The committee recommends that the government provide a formal response to the Whittaker
Review which was completed in 2015.
Australian Government response
The Government supports this recommendation.
The Government released its formal response to the Whittaker Review for public consultation on
22 September 2023, accepting 345 of the 394 recommendations. The Government subsequently
consulted on proposed amendments to the Personal Property Securities Act 2009 and regulations.
Timing of any further work will be announced in due course.
12 | Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 27
The committee recommends that the comprehensive review consider unfair preferences and
voidable transactions as a core aspect of potential insolvency reform.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
The Government notes that the PC may consider these matters as part of its business dynamism
inquiry.
Recommendation 28
The committee recommends that the government amends the Corporations Act 2001 to expressly
clarify the treatment of trusts with corporate trustees during insolvency.
Australian Government response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
Creating a legislative framework for trusts with corporate trustees in external administration is an
important area of reform to help enhance the efficiency of external administrations of insolvent
corporate trustees and support improved outcomes for distressed companies, their creditors and
the broader economy.
The Government will consider holistically the timing and sequencing of any major corporate
insolvency reforms, including in relation to trusts with corporate trustees, alongside its response
to the PC business dynamism inquiry.
Response to the recommendations | 13
