Australian Government response to the
Senate Economics References Committee report:
Funding and Resourcing for the CSIRO
AUGUST 2026
1
Introduction
The Albanese Government acknowledges the work of the committee and the participation of
stakeholders who contributed to the inquiry for Funding and Resourcing for the
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) (the Inquiry).
The government recognises that CSIRO, as the national science agency, is a cornerstone of
Australia’s R&D ecosystem and sovereign science capability. CSIRO’s scientific research
contributes to long-term productivity growth, industry competitiveness and emerging
technology adoption, which are central to sustainable economic growth. Publicly funded
science is critical to the national interest and to solving some of Australia’s biggest
challenges.
The government is backing CSIRO to deliver the research and technological breakthroughs
Australian industries need and communities rely on. In the 2026-27 Budget, the government
committed $387.4 million over 4 years from 2026-27 to ensure CSIRO remains fit for the
modern age and continues delivering groundbreaking research aligned with Australia’s
national science priorities and a Future Made in Australia. This investment is in addition to
the $278 million in funding announced through 2025 and CSIRO’s approximately $1 billion
annual government funding allocation.
CSIRO is a corporate Commonwealth entity (CCE) constituted and operating under the
Science and Industry Research Act 1949 (SIR Act) and governed by the Public Governance,
Performance and Accountability Act 2013 (PGPA Act). The CSIRO Board and Executive are
responsible for CSIRO’s budget management and ensuring CSIRO operates in a financially
sustainable way. The government recognises and supports the independence of the CSIRO
Board and Executive in managing the operations of CSIRO.
The government provides the following responses to the committee’s recommendations and
those presented in the dissenting views from The Australian Greens Senators and Senator
David Pocock.
2
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that CSIRO continues to engage with CSIRO staff who have
provided evidence that they feel there is a lack of consultation and dialogue around job
losses or when programs are to be discontinued or redirected.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
Under the SIR Act, the Chief Executive of CSIRO and the CSIRO Board are responsible for
internal management and ensuring the proper performance of CSIRO. As set out in
clause 54 of the CSIRO Enterprise Agreement 2023-26, CSIRO is required to consult on
major changes that have a significant effect on staff. The enterprise agreement provides that
a consultation includes a period of more than 2 weeks of discussion with staff and their
representatives on a proposed change.
CSIRO implements this through a structured process comprising:
• 2 weeks of early engagement
• followed by 3 weeks of formal consultation on a proposal before a decision is
communicated.
During this period, engagement and consultation occur through both townhall and individual
meetings with potentially impacted staff, their peers and their representatives. Consistent
with its enterprise agreement obligations, CSIRO will continue to consult with staff and union
representatives on major workplace changes through well-established processes and
policies.
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that the Albanese Government clarify whether there will be
any further funding cuts or jobs losses at CSIRO.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The government has not cut funding for CSIRO. The government has committed an
additional $387.4 million in the 2026-27 Budget for CSIRO, in addition to the $278 million
investment in 2025-26. This investment is on top of CSIRO’s existing nearly $1 billion annual
funding allocation.
This investment will support CSIRO in meeting the rising costs of operating critical science
and research infrastructure, allowing it to stabilise its workforce.
As a CCE, CSIRO is responsible for managing its budget to ensure it operates in a
financially sustainable way. Under the direction of its Board, CSIRO will continue to refine its
research capability as needed, responding to evolving scientific and national needs to
maximise the value of the public funding entrusted to it.
3
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the Albanese Government publicly advise how
Australia’s sovereign, public research capability will be protected in the face of funding
cuts and jobs losses at CSIRO.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The government has not cut funding to CSIRO – it has increased CSIRO’s funding by
$665.4 million between 2025-26 and 2029-30.
A strong research, development and innovation (RD&I) system is central to a Future Made in
Australia – a future that delivers national resilience, higher productivity, better jobs, stronger
sovereign capability and improved living standards for Australians.
The government is funding priority measures now, while positioning Australia’s RD&I system
to be stronger, more effective and fit for purpose over the long term. CSIRO plays a central
role in maintaining sovereign research capability. Each year, the government provides
targeted funding to support CSIRO’s operations, sustain nationally significant research
infrastructure, and maintain capability in areas aligned to national priorities.
The 2026-27 Budget included measures to strengthen Australia’s sovereign science
capabilities, with $1.5 billion in additional investment. These measures included establishing
a new National Resilience and Science Council to better coordinate and align public
innovation investments, and the $387.4 million investment in CSIRO plus ongoing funding
for the Australian Centre for Disease Preparedness. The additional investment in CSIRO will
help it maintain the infrastructure and capability it needs to prioritise and deliver on the
national challenges Australia faces.
This national science investment is complemented by efforts to strengthen Australia’s global
research engagement. Australia is on track to become an Associated Country to the
European Union’s Horizon Europe program in 2027, the final year of the current framework
program (FP9). Horizon Europe is the world’s largest pooled research funding program, with
FP9 valued at around $155 billion (AUD). Association will provide Australian researchers
and research entities with access to Pillar II of Horizon Europe, opening opportunities to lead
and participate in research projects in areas such as supply chain security, critical
technologies, advanced computing, climate and clean energy, health, space and critical
minerals. This will attract talented researchers to Australia and allow research projects at a
scale that would be difficult for Australia to achieve alone.
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the Government continues to engage with CSIRO
regarding financial sustainability of this important public institution and consider the
impacts that reduced public and private funding have on Australian research capability.
Response
The Australian Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
The government will continue to engage with CSIRO to ensure it is supported to deliver the
research Australia needs.
4
Australia’s sovereign science capability and R&D ecosystem underpin Australia’s economic
security and resilience. In 2025-26, the Australian Government invested $15.1 billion in R&D,
including through the R&D Tax Incentive, the Australian Research Council – National
Competitive Grants Program and CSIRO (https://www.industry.gov.au/publications/science-
research-and-innovation-sri-budget-tables). In the 2026-27 Budget, the government invested
over $1.5 billion in new funding for Australia’s science and research institutions, allowing
research agencies, including CSIRO, to continue contributing to Australia’s research
capability and capacity.
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends that the Government continues to engage with CSIRO about
its strategic direction in light of the final review report for Ambitious Australia: Strategic
Examination of Research and Development (SERD Review report).
Response
The Australian Government agrees with this recommendation.
The government welcomed the Strategic Examination of Research and Development
(SERD) Ambitious Australia report as a comprehensive and ambitious assessment of
Australia’s RD&I system and opportunities to improve it.
The government maintains engagement with CSIRO in several ways, including the Minister’s
Statement of Expectations. These mechanisms support alignment between government
priorities and CSIRO’s strategic direction, including how the organisation positions its
capabilities to deliver on national priorities.
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends that the Government address the recommendations within
the Strategic Examination of Research and Development (SERD) Review report,
particularly recommendations which will have either a direct or indirect impact on CSIRO,
and publicly advise whether the Government will implement the SERD recommendations.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The SERD final report, Ambitious Australia, recommends continuing to position CSIRO as a
core contributor to the research, development and innovation system and Australia’s
industrial objectives, supported by sustainable and targeted funding.
The 2026-27 Budget includes an additional $387.4 million investment in CSIRO, supporting
the organisation to address its sustainability challenges and maintain critical research
capability.
Measures in the 2026-27 Budget, including establishing the National Resilience and Science
Council to better coordinate and align public innovation investments with Australia’s
economic objectives, are a first step in responding to the Ambitious Australia report.
5
The Australian Greens Senators’ dissenting report
Recommendation 1
The Australian Greens recommend the Australian Government immediately cease and
reverse all recently determined and imminently expected ongoing funding and staffing
cuts to the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO).
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Albanese Government has not cut funding to CSIRO. The government has committed
additional funding to CSIRO (on top of its annual appropriation of over $1 billion):
$387.4 million in the 2026-27 Budget and $278 million in 2025-26.
As publicly noted (https://www.csiro.au/en/news/all/news/2025/november/statement-on-
csiro-research-direction), CSIRO is undertaking a systematic reform of its research effort
and sharpening its focus on what Australia needs now and into the future. The CSIRO Board
and Executive are responsible for these decisions and ensuring the organisation can operate
in a financially sustainable way.
Recommendation 2
The Australian Greens recommend the Australian Government commit new, increased
and ongoing funds to the CSIRO for “public good” science. Further, the Australian Greens
recommend that the Australian Government establish a forward funding trajectory for
CSIRO that increases research capacity annually in real terms to meet the growing and
emerging scientific challenges Australia faces. This trajectory should reflect international
best practice in relation to the funding of equivalent bodies as a proportion of GDP.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
Publicly funded science is critical to the national interest and to solving some of Australia’s
biggest challenges. The Albanese Government is backing CSIRO to deliver the research
and technological breakthroughs Australian industries need and communities rely on. As
part of the 2026-27 Budget, the government has committed $387.4 million over 4 years from
2026-27, and ongoing funding of approximately $38 million a year from 2030-31. This
funding will help strengthen CSIRO and allow it to stabilise its workforce, so that it can
continue to deliver research to help Australia meet new and emerging challenges.
The 2026-27 Budget included support for Australia’s association to Horizon Europe, subject
to the completion of our treaty process. Association will provide Australian researchers and
research entities with access to Pillar II of Horizon Europe’s 2027 funding calls. This will
unlock opportunities for Australians to participate in the world’s largest pooled research
funding program.
6
Recommendation 3
The Australian Greens recommend the Australian Government urgently establishes a
review to address and mitigate internal governance and cultural norms that require
scientists to seek new sources of external revenue (clients) to fund “public good” science
(for example, but not limited to, climate and atmospheric monitoring and research,
environmental research and public health research).
• Note: The Australian Greens acknowledge that some areas of commercial
endeavour, and any associated scientific or industrial research conducted by
CSIRO (for example: mineral extraction or manufacturing), may reasonably and
appropriately be underpinned by external revenue targets and that these targets
may be reflected in funding structures and sources for these specific CSIRO
research streams.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
CSIRO collaborates with an extensive range of industry and research partners to deliver
research services and breakthroughs that Australia needs. As a CCE under the SIR Act, one
of CSIRO’s primary purposes is to carry out scientific research to assist Australian industry.
To enable this, CSIRO partners with Australian companies to build sovereign capability and
resilience. External revenue generated through partnerships with government and industry,
such as commercial ventures and co-investment arrangements, is reinvested into CSIRO’s
research and operations. This allows CSIRO to capitalise and leverage its public funding to
produce more research and make the most of its public funding.
The CSIRO Board and Executive are responsible for deciding CSIRO’s strategic direction
and operational arrangements to ensure sustainable operations and delivery against its
obligations under the SIR Act.
Recommendation 4
The Australian Greens recommend the Australian Government urgently establish an audit
of CSIRO, conducted by the Australian National Audit Office (ANAO), with particular focus
on its capital funding situation and the impacts of previous management decisions on both
past and projected organisational sustainability.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
CSIRO, as a CCE, is subject to the requirements of the SIR Act and the PGPA Act. CSIRO
publishes corporate plans and annual reports that outline its strategies, priorities,
performance and use of public resources. The CSIRO Board, as the accountable authority,
and the CSIRO Executive, are responsible for ensuring these requirements are met in an
accountable and transparent manner.
As an independent officer of the Parliament, the Auditor-General determines the ANAO’s
work program. As such, responses to parliamentary committee recommendations directed to
the ANAO are not included as part of the government’s response.
7
Recommendation 5
The Australian Greens recommend the Australian Government urgently establishes a
mechanism for the provision of low-or-no interest loans (off-balance sheet) or similar
finance to fund capital works and infrastructure maintenance or upgrades as required by
the CSIRO.
• The intention of such mechanisms would be to alleviate the sustained budgetary
pressures these works place on the CSIRO’s operating costs which have
precipitated much of the current organisational requirement to find savings.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
Under the PGPA Act, the CSIRO Board is the accountable authority and is therefore
responsible for the financial sustainability of the organisation.
8
Senator David Pocock’s dissenting report
Recommendation 1
That the Federal Government provide an immediate uplift of $252.3 million to CSIRO’s
appropriation in the 2026-27 Budget, ongoing, together with annual indexation top-ups
sufficient to halt and progressively reverse the real-terms decline in CSIRO funding.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
As part of the 2026-27 Budget, the Australian Government has committed $387.4 million
over 4 years from 2026-27, and ongoing funding of approximately $38 million a year from
2030-31. This funding will help stabilise CSIRO’s workforce and meet the long-term costs of
operating critical science and research infrastructure.
Recommendation 2
That the Federal Government act decisively on the recommendations of the Strategic
Examination of Research and Development to establish a measurable, time-bound plan to
increase total Australian R&D investment.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The SERD Ambitious Australia report presents a comprehensive and complex set of
recommendations. The report highlights a lack of strategic direction and coordination, which
limits impact in areas of national need and opportunity.
The government is establishing the National Resilience and Science Council to better
coordinate and align public innovation investments with Australia’s economic objectives. A
better coordinated RD&I system with clearer goals will improve productivity, crowd in private
sector RD&I investment and enhance spillover effects in priority areas.
This, alongside tax reforms as part of the 2026-27 Budget’s productivity package and
investment in national science capability, is one of the first steps in responding to the
Ambitious Australia report. Further reforms in response to the Ambitious Australia
recommendations will be considered by government with input from the Council.
Recommendation 3
That the proposed redundancies in the Environment Research Unit be halted and
reconsidered by the CSIRO, given the clear need for climate modelling capabilities within
CSIRO to be maintained.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
9
As a CCE, the CSIRO Board and Executive are responsible for managing CSIRO’s budget
to ensure it is operating in a financially sustainable way, including through decisions on
staffing, organisation structure and operations. The decisions CSIRO made about its
research portfolio included a systematic review of CSIRO’s entire research portfolio and
consultation process with staff. The changes reflect CSIRO’s commitment to deliver
research aligned with national priorities, at scale and to maximise the value of the public
funds entrusted to CSIRO.
Recommendation 4
That the Federal Government index CSIRO’s depreciation appropriation, beginning in the
2026-27 Budget, and undertake a one-off reset to bring the depreciation appropriation into
line with current capital and depreciation costs.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
As a CCE, CSIRO’s depreciation appropriation is not subject to indexation (RMG 124).
Applying a general indexation method to the depreciation appropriation would not guarantee
its alignment with the depreciation expense.
The Commonwealth’s annual appropriation to CSIRO does increase year on year, and under
the PGPA Act, CCEs are required to manage their budgets in a financially sustainable way.
This includes balancing operational expenditure with capital costs.
Recommendation 5
That the Federal Government update the Minister’s Statement of Expectations to the
CSIRO, to substantially reduce the need for cost-recovery targets in research areas
designated as public-good or as protected sovereign capabilities, and that this Statement
of Expectations explicitly recognise the legitimate public-good purpose of certain research
that cannot reasonably be commercialised.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Minister for Science issues Statements of Expectations to CSIRO to communicate the
priorities of the government. The last Statement of Expectations was issued in
October 2025.
CSIRO seeks to recover costs for some areas of its research. These funds are reinvested
into CSIRO’s research programs, leveraging the nearly $1 billion in annually appropriated
public funds to continue producing the science Australia needs.
Recommendation 6
That the CSIRO immediately release in full all documents, presentations and other
outputs produced by McKinsey & Company under the 2022 Future Ways of Working
10
engagement and the prior 2021-22 engagement. And that CSIRO contracts above
$200,000 require open and competitive tendering on the Commonwealth tender model.
Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
CSIRO provided copies of the requested documents to the committee Secretariat in
response to a question from Senator Barbara Pocock during the Inquiry hearing.
As a CCE, CSIRO’s policies and procedures for procuring goods and services adhere to the
Commonwealth Procurement Rules.
11
