Australian Government Response to the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations
and Financial Services Inquiry report:
Regulation of the use of financial services such as
credit cards and digital wallets for online gambling
in Australia
May 2023
Introduction
On 25 March 2021, the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services (the
committee) began its inquiry, ‘Regulation of the use of financial services such as credit cards and
digital wallets for online gambling in Australia’ (the inquiry). The inquiry examined the extent of
consumer detriment in using credit cards for online gambling, existing consumer protections and
regulatory approaches implemented in other jurisdictions to restrict the use of credit cards for
gambling. The committee tabled its final report on 19 November 2021.
The Australian Government (the Government) welcomes the report and recognises the issues raised in
it are of great interest to many Australians.
Government work on online gambling protections
The Government is committed to implementing the National Consumer Protection Framework for
Online Wagering (National Framework) in collaboration with the states and territories. This work will
include the launch of the National Self-Exclusion Register, to be known as BetStop, which is expected
to be operational in the coming months. BetStop will allow individuals to self-exclude themselves
from all online and telephone wagering services in a single process. Other measures under the
National Framework already implemented in 2023 include consistent gambling messaging and
responsible online wagering staff training.
On 15 September 2022, the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Social Policy and Legal
Affairs launched an inquiry into ‘Online gambling and its impacts on those experiencing gambling
harm’, including the appropriateness of current gambling regulations in light of emerging
technologies, payment options and products. The Government will consider the findings of this
inquiry when the Committee releases its final report in mid-2023.
Response to Recommendations in Main Report
The committee made 3 recommendations in its report and the Government supports these
recommendations.
Responses to the individual recommendations are below:
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends the Australian Government prioritise the collection of data on online
gambling in Australia, including the size and growth of the online gambling market, online gambling
with credit, and the extent and nature of the associated harms.
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
There is merit in collecting additional data on online gambling in Australia to provide valuable
information to Government for policy development.
The Government notes the Department of Social Services is considering the outcomes from a pilot
study of a National Gambling Monitoring System by the Australian Gambling Research Centre at the
Australian Institute of Family Studies. Further, state and territory governments also collect regular
data on gambling and gambling harm, including online gambling, in their joint role with the
Commonwealth of regulating online wagering providers.
The Government will work with state and territory governments to determine feasible options for
collecting data on online gambling, including whether data already collected can be leveraged, and
what new arrangements may need to be developed, to establish an improved dataset that can provide
greater insights into online gambling trends in Australia. This will also support the evaluation of the
National Framework.
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that the Australian Government develop and implement legislation to ban
online gambling service providers of wagering, gaming and other gambling services (but not
lotteries) from accepting payment by credit cards, including via digital wallets.
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the Australian Government ensure that, in designing and
implementing recommendation 2, these measures have no adverse consequences for lotteries,
including the activities of not-for-profits, charities and newsagents.
The Government supports recommendations 2 and 3.
The Government will legislate to prohibit the use of credit card payments for online gambling. This
will increase consumer protections for persons at risk of gambling harm.
Since the early 2000s, states and territories have prohibited the use of credit cards for gambling at the
majority of land-based gambling services, including in casinos, racetracks, TAB outlets and poker
machine venues. Extending the ban to interactive gambling services would move towards greater
consistency between the online and land-based gambling regulatory regimes.
Banning the use of credit cards for online gambling is also consistent with general community
sentiment. Research released by the Australian banking peak body, the Australian Banking
Association, in December 2020 noted that 81% of Australians thought gambling on credit cards
should be restricted or banned. Consumers who wish to gamble online now have more options
available to them for using their own money, including debit cards and bank transfers.
The wagering and banking industries support a ban on credit cards for online gambling. A number of
banks and financial institutions ban or restrict their customers from using credit cards for gambling.
The United Kingdom (UK) implemented a ban on the use of credit cards for gambling in 2020. The
ban applies to online and land-based gambling (except for lotteries purchased from land-based
venues) and was achieved by applying licence conditions to gambling operators. An evaluation report
published by the UK Gambling Commission in November 2021 (UK Evaluation) found the ban had
achieved positive results to date.
The UK Evaluation found that gambling operators successfully implemented the ban and that
financial institutions had been able to block credit card use through digital wallets. It also indicated
that gamblers were not falling into debt as frequently or as severely following the introduction of the
ban. Most consumers (76%) who previously gambled with credit cards did not change their behaviour
to gamble with other types of borrowed money.
The Government will legislate to prohibit the use of credit card payments for online gambling.
Consultation with industry and other interested stakeholders will be undertaken on amendments to
enact a ban. The Government will take into account any adverse impact on lotteries, including those
offered by not-for-profits, charities and newsagents.
The Government will also legislate to provide the Australian Communications and Media Authority
(ACMA) with enforceable undertakings and remedial directions powers to enforce the credit card
prohibition and other online gambling offences. This was a recommendation in ACMA’s Report on
the Review of Part 2B of the Interactive Gambling Act 2001 – Credit betting prohibitions (the ACMA
report), which was published in August 2021.
Improving ACMA’s enforcement powers is consistent with the ACMA report and will support the
ACMA to address potential consumer harms associated with online gambling. An enforceable
undertaking would allow the ACMA to negotiate a legally binding commitment given by a person or
entity to act or refrain from acting. A remedial direction would allow the ACMA to provide specific
directions to a person or entity to rectify a statutory breach and provide extra assurance around
ongoing compliance. Both options are quicker and cheaper than litigation, and would be beneficial for
enforcing a ban on credit cards for online gambling, as well as for compliance with existing IGA
provisions, including those related to the National Self-Exclusion Register.
Providing these additional enforcement options would also align the ACMA’s enforcement powers
under the IGA with its existing powers under the Broadcasting Services Act 1992, the
Telecommunications Act 1997, the Spam Act 2003 and the Radiocommunications Act 1992.
The Government will consider the other credit betting recommendations in the ACMA report during
consultation on the credit card prohibition.
