Australian Government response to the
Independent National Security Legislation Monitor
report:
Review into Division 105A (and related provisions) of the
Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth)
JUNE 2026
Australian Government response to the Independent National Security Legislation
Monitor report
Review into Division 105A (and related provisions) of the Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth)
The Government thanks the former Independent National Security Legislation Monitor
(INSLM) for his report: Review into Division 105A (and related provisions) of the Criminal
Code Act 1995 (Cth). The Government has carefully considered the recommendations and
reasoning contained in the report.
The Government recently introduced the Counter-Terrorism Legislation Amendment
Bill 2026. This Bill includes significant reforms to the post-sentence order framework in
Division 105A of the Criminal Code, as well as other counter-terrorism powers including the
control order framework in Division 104 of the Criminal Code.
Critically, the Bill proposes to streamline the existing order frameworks to establish control
orders as the primary mechanism to impose conditions on serious terrorist offenders in the
community. This would be achieved by removing the ability for the AFP Minister to apply
for an extended supervision order. It would, however, remain open to a State or Territory
Supreme Court to issue an extended supervision order in response to an application for a
continuing detention order where the Court is not satisfied that the thresholds for such a
detention order have been met.
The Government considers that, as a result of this change, several of the INSLM’s
recommendations relating to the extended supervision order framework are no longer
applicable.
Continuing detention orders
The Government does not accept the INSLM’s recommendation to abolish continuing
detention orders. Having regard to the current terrorism threat environment, the existing
statutory safeguards, and the judicious use of these powers to date, the Government considers
it would not be appropriate to abolish continuing detention orders.
Australia is facing a challenging and evolving terrorism threat environment. Continuing
detention orders are an important element of Australia’s legal framework to manage the risk
of terrorism. These orders play a critical role in allowing the continued detention of a serious
terrorist offender at the end of their sentence, where no other measures are likely to be
effective in managing an unacceptable risk that the offender may commit a serious terrorism
offence. While extraordinary, these powers are vital to ensure unacceptable and unavoidable
risks to the community are managed appropriately.
The statutory safeguards applying to these orders are proportionately restrictive. A continuing
detention order may only be made in relation to a person who is at least 18 years of age and
who has been convicted of, and is in custody for, one of a specified set of serious terrorism
offences. The Court may only impose a continuing detention order if satisfied to a high
degree of probability, based on admissible evidence, that the person poses an unacceptable
risk of committing a serious terrorism offence.
Importantly, the Court may only issue a continuing detention order if satisfied that no other
less restrictive measure available under Part 5.3 of the Criminal Code, such as a control order
or extended supervision order, would be effective in preventing the unacceptable risk to the
community. In this way, these orders operate as a mechanism of last resort where other
powers could not effectively manage the risk posed by a particular serious terrorist offender.
The Government notes that there have been two applications for continuing detention orders
and two continuing detention orders issued since the introduction of the post-sentence order
framework. The limited use of these orders does not indicate a lack of utility, but instead
demonstrates that these powers are used in a judicious and proportionate manner in only
cases involving the most serious risk to the community.
The Bill will extend these powers for a further 3 years until 7 December 2029. This new
sunsetting date will ensure that these powers, noting their significance, will be subject to
regular parliamentary review to ensure they remain necessary, proportionate and appropriate.
Rehabilitation and reintegration
The Government acknowledges the focus on rehabilitation and reintegration of serious
terrorist offenders in the INSLM’s report.
As outlined above, the Government’s proposed legislative amendments would ensure that
control orders are the primary mechanism to impose conditions on serious terrorist offenders
at the end of their sentence. Following amendments made by the Counter-Terrorism and
Other Legislation Amendment Act 2023, the Federal Court may impose conditions under a
control order which include requiring a person to attend and participate in treatment,
rehabilitation or intervention programs or activities, or undertake psychological or psychiatric
assessment.
Since those amendments came into force, four interim or confirmed control orders have been
issued, of which three included therapeutic conditions. This includes conditions relating to
psychological assessment and treatment, case management, and disengagement and
rehabilitation. This demonstrates that rehabilitation and reintegration are key considerations
when determining the appropriate conditions to apply under a control order.
The Federal Court has commented favourably on the inclusion of conditions of this kind in
control orders, noting that these conditions can provide an important protective framework
and allow for a person’s re-integration into the community to be monitored.
Conclusion
The protection of the Australian community against the threat of terrorism remains one of the
Government’s top priorities. The Government considers the Bill before Parliament will
ensure that Australia’s counter-terrorism order framework is fit for purpose for responding to
existing and future threats.
