Australian Government response to the
Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade report:
Inquiry into the Defence Annual Report 2023–24
June 2026
1
Introduction
The Government continues to drive delivery and significant defence reform across the Defence
portfolio to strengthen Australia’s security in the face of deteriorating trends in our strategic
environment.
The 2026 National Defence Strategy sets out the Government’s framework to guide the continued
transformation of Australia’s capability, force structure, acquisition, recruitment and international
engagement. The 2024 National Defence Strategy set out for the first time the concept of National
Defence set out for the first time the concept of National Defence and adopted the Strategy of Denial
as the cornerstone of Defence Planning. The 2026 National Defence Strategy builds on these
foundations by:
• Increasing efforts to develop greater self-reliance over the longer term so Defence
can more ably and independently deter force projection against Australia;
• Prioritising capability acquisition and sustainment plans to deliver the Strategy of
Denial, drawing on lessons learned from the war in Ukraine and conflicts in the
Middle East;
• Strengthening the resilience of Australia’s sovereign defence industrial base and
building stronger, more diverse international industrial partnerships;
• Improving national civil preparedness and national resilience as part of National
Defence to help shield Australia from regional or global disruption; and
• Increasing coordination with regional partners to collectively deter actions inimical to
our shared interests and shape a region governed by rights and rules, not fear or
force.
To deliver the 2026 National Defence Strategy, the Government is investing an additional $14 billion
over the next four years and $53 billion over the next 10 years in the 2026 Integrated Investment
Program. This increase is historic, taking the total additional investment from the 2024 National
Defence Strategy and 2026 National Defence Strategy to $30 billion over the next four years and $117
billion over the decade to 2035-36.
To meet the challenges posed by our complex strategic environment and ensure the Government’s
investment in Defence is well spent, the Government will continue to drive urgent and fundamental
reform within the Defence portfolio. The Government’s approach to the transformation and reform is
disciplined and ambitious. It includes:
• Reforming the portfolio capability development and delivery functions;
• Enhancing the delivery of the conventionally-armed, nuclear-powered submarine
enterprise; and
• Delivering the Government’s response to the Defence Estate Audit.
The establishment of the Defence Delivery Agency will ensure capability acquisition and
sustainment are streamlined and accelerated.
The Government will progress these priorities in line with other strategic and enterprise-level
reforms to ensure the Defence portfolio is agile, efficient, effective and has the requisite
structures, processes, priorities and culture to deliver this mission.
.
2
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends the publicly available 2026 Integrated Investment Program provide
more detail related to space domain project timelines and funding allocation.
Response:
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The public 2026 Integrated Investment Program includes additional relevant detail on space
domain projects and funding allocation.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that the Department of Defence consider ways to encourage and
support Defence personnel and their families in relocating to Australia’s Northern Bases, as a priority,
and then more generally.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
Defence has commenced work in support of personnel relocating to Australia’s Northern Bases in
line with the Defence Workforce Plan. In May 2025, Defence established the People Capability in
Defence Northern Bases Working Group (the Working Group). The Working Group supports ADF
members and their families. The Working Group reports to the Defence People Committee, and will
be the avenue through which Defence addresses this recommendation.
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the Department of Defence continues to engage with government
in the Northern Territory at both the territory-wide and local levels to ensure housing, community
and other supportive infrastructure, especially local maternity services, reflects the expected growth
in the number of Defence personnel and families.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
Defence conducts regular State and Territory consultative forums, which provide a key mechanism
for collaboration between Defence and the Northern Territory Government to coordinate and
ensure investments support Defence requirements. Defence maintains a strong relationship with the
Northern Territory Government on matters that affect Defence personnel and their families.
Defence has been informed throughout the Northern Territory Government’s response to changes
in maternity service availability in Darwin, and reduced general practitioner services in Katherine.
Early and ongoing visibility, along with engagement with the Northern Territory Department of
Health, has allowed Defence to understand the implications for Defence members and their families
and to identify any adjustments needed to maintain equity of access to care.
3
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that future Department of Defence reporting, related to critical
infrastructure projects funded by the Australian Government and US Force Posture Initiative
indicates project timelines and value of funding contribution from respective partners where national
security conditions permit.
Response:
The Government agrees in principle with this recommendation, noting national security conditions.
Information about Australian-funded infrastructure investments that support Australia’s Force
Posture Initiatives with the United States is reported through the Integrated Investment Program
and through the Public Works Committee. Information about United States-funded infrastructure
investments in Australia is publicly available from authoritative United States Government sources
published at the time of contract award. This includes information such as contract value, project
scope and timeframes, and the recipient of the award of the contract.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends that changes to Defence funding continue to be accompanied by a
conversation with the Australian public about the changes being experienced in the current strategic
environment, including through the biennial National Defence Strategy updates, in so doing
generating a degree of ‘social licence’.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
The biennial National Defence Strategy cycle established by the Government ensures that our
strategy and investment priorities keep pace with the rapidly evolving strategic environment. This
process also facilitates a regular and frank conversation about the importance of investing in
Australian Defence. The National Defence Strategy is prepared alongside the Integrated Investment
Program, which provides the Australian public with regular updates on the Government’s capability
investment plans aligned to our strategic settings.
4
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends that the Department of Defence provides, where possible, more
granular data in future Defence Annual Reports to include a breakdown of:
• aggregate figures according to each tier of a defence industrial base
• expenditure on Australian small and medium enterprise as a proportion of acquisition and
sustainment costs.
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommends that the Department of Defence include in future Annual Reports the
outcomes and progress of actions related to each sovereign priority, as detailed in the Defence
Industry Development Strategy annexes.
Response for Recommendations 6 and 7:
The Government agrees in principle with these recommendations.
Noting some data is classified and unable to be released publicly, aggregated components will be
included in the Defence Annual Report.
Defence continues to collect data, develop systems and carry out analysis to develop a more detailed
understanding of each tier of the sovereign defence industrial base.
Defence also continues to collect data, develop systems and carry out analysis to contribute to a
better understanding of the progress of actions related to each sovereign priority. This includes
regular reporting and updates to the Defence Industry Development Strategy governance board.
Defence will continue to improve Industrial Intelligence Capability systems and sources to improve
the quality of data reported as part of the Defence Annual Report and the performance cycle.
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government continue to work with industry to
identify and promote opportunities, and overcome barriers for Australian small and medium
enterprises in the defence sector, within Australia and with international trusted partners.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
Defence will continue to work closely with industry to identify and promote opportunities for
Australian small and medium enterprises, and to address barriers to participation in the defence
sector domestically and with trusted international partners.
Through the Defence Industry Development Strategy, Defence is refining and enhancing its industry
support and engagement mechanisms to better align Australian industry with Defence priorities and
demand signals.
This includes targeted support to uplift small and medium enterprise capability and readiness for
domestic Defence programs, increased integration of Australian businesses into global defence
supply chains and enhanced support for export opportunities where these contribute to sustainable
sovereign capability.
5
The uplift of Australian small and medium enterprises in the defence sector, particularly to the Tier 2
level, strengthens the resilience of the sovereign defence industrial base and the ability to bring new
equipment and innovations into service.
Defence will continue to work with trusted international partners, including AUKUS-related
initiatives, to enable Australian industry participation in collaborative capability development and
advanced technology pathways.
Recommendation 9
The Committee recommends that as part of the design work for the Defence Delivery Agency
consideration is given to the establishment of a Defence Coordinator, a role which could provide a
project management-type of oversight to keep abreast of all capability related projects, deliver
quarterly updates and advice on the status of projects, provide quality control oversight, and be a
liaison between industry, the Department of Defence and Ministers. These functions could be
performed by the recently announced National Armaments Director.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Government has established a whole-of-government taskforce to develop a detailed
implementation plan for Defence Reforms, including the establishment of the Defence Delivery
Agency (DDA) and the National Armaments Director (NAD).
The taskforce is developing the detailed design and pathway to implement these reforms, including
functions of the DDA. Consideration of the merits of establishing a Defence Coordinator, including
whether this role should be performed by the NAD, is subject to Government consideration.
The reforms are directed at improving Defence’s ability to deliver military capability on time, within
budget and aligned with Australia’s strategic priorities, reflecting the increasing scale and complexity
of modern Defence capability programs.
The NAD will be responsible for managing a significant portion of the expansion of Defence capability
and a significant increase in Defence spending (an additional $70 billion over the next decade). This
includes major programs in naval shipbuilding, guided weapons and explosive ordnance,
autonomous systems and other sectors critical for Australia’s national security.
Recommendation 10
The Committee recommends that the Department of Defence consider establishing a ‘Pathways to
Shipbuilding’ national campaign that raises awareness of career opportunities in shipbuilding.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government will give consideration to establishing a ‘Pathways to Shipbuilding’ national
campaign that raises awareness of career opportunities in shipbuilding, as well as the construction
of Australia’s future conventionally-armed, nuclear-powered submarines.
Recommendation 11
6
The Committee recommends that the Department of Defence and relevant Australian Government
departments consider measures to increase transparency of Prime System Integrator utilisation of
Australian small and medium enterprises in the delivery of Defence outcomes.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Government continues to refine Defence’s approach to industry participation and transparency
through existing and evolving policy settings. This includes strengthening expectations for Australian
industry participation, improving visibility of small and medium enterprises involvement in major
Defence programs and ensuring that reporting arrangements support meaningful insight into
industry outcomes.
Recommendation 12
The Committee recommends that the Department of Defence continue to implement its Defence
Innovation, Science and Technology Strategy, providing a coordinated approach to investment thus
supporting innovation and successful risk-taking by industry, and to generate data to verify such
implementation.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
Implementation of the Defence Innovation, Science and Technology Strategy is ongoing and in line
with National Defence Strategy requirements. Defence has embarked on a refresh of the
Defence Innovation, Science and Technology Strategy for 2026 consistent with the
2026 National Defence Strategy and informed by the Defence Industry Development Strategy.
Defence is undertaking significant engagement with industry to provide opportunities for industry to
gather strategic insight to Defence capability requirements, incentivising innovation and
de-risking science and technology projects. Defence is holding briefings and convening industry
round tables as part of the strategy refresh process. This consultation will result in further
opportunities to identify tangible actions to collaborate with industry.
Recommendation 13
The Committee recommends that the Department of Defence continues to improve and align its
procurement practices, documentation, and procedures to efficiently deliver for the new strategic
environment and the changed needs of an integrated, focused force.
Response:
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The consolidation of the Capability Acquisition and Sustainment, Guided Weapons and Explosive
Ordnance and Naval Shipbuilding and Sustainment Groups into the Defence Delivery Group from
July 2026, and the establishment of the Defence Delivery Agency from July 2027, will substantially
improve performance and accountability across the Defence capability delivery enterprise.
Recommendation 14
7
The Committee encourages the Department of Defence to scope and schedule projects elements at a
level appropriate for Australian small and medium enterprise to bid directly where appropriate.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
Defence already pursues this objective through a range of mechanisms including Australian industry
participation policies and structured engagement with Prime System Integrators in alignment with
Sovereign Defence Industrial Priorities. These approaches enable Defence to expand opportunities
for Australian participation while ensuring that capability, integration and delivery considerations are
managed appropriately.
Additionally, the Advanced Strategic Capabilities Accelerator is continuing to define missions that
address urgent capability problems through flexible and agile procurement approaches that enable
innovative small to medium enterprises to bid.
The Government’s Defence Industry Development Strategy is reforming procurement to simplify
how Defence engages with industry, including strengthening engagement with risk. Where direct
contracting with small to medium enterprises is suitable and represents value for money, Defence
will continue to pursue those opportunities.
This approach is supported through the implementation of an industry intelligence capability, which
will assist Defence to refine its understanding of industrial capacity, capability and readiness over
time.
Through these arrangements, the Government seeks to increase transparency of opportunities,
improve access for Australian industry, and ensure that industrial participation settings support both
sovereign capability development and timely delivery of Defence outcomes.
Recommendation 15
The Committee recommends that the Defence Delivery Agency and or the Australian Submarine
Agency look to maintain consistent and clear communication lines with AUKUS industry in relation to
tender, procurement and overall engagement.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
AUKUS partners share a vision of supporting an informed, integrated trilateral industrial base, and
will continue to rely on a strong trilateral industrial base to deliver capability to our war fighters.
AUKUS nations have bolstered efforts to break down barriers to collaboration, create a more
integrated defence industrial base and private sector partnership, and identify new opportunities for
trilateral capability development, but work continues. To date, AUKUS industry engagement has
been undertaken through dedicated classified and unclassified briefings. AUKUS partners also
engage industry on Pillar II through the Advanced Capabilities Industry Forum.
One of the five lines of effort set out in Australia’s AUKUS Submarine Industry Strategy is “creating
demand clarity through proactive and progressive communication as requirements mature”. The
Strategy sets out how this will occur, from the development and communication of strategic
priorities, through to the publication of demand forecasts, and ultimately the contracting and
procurement of supplies and services.
8
Recommendation 16
The Committee recommends the Australian Government work to consider measures to improve
workforce mobility between AUKUS nations, including consideration of visa settings in AUKUS nations
to secure the required workforce and improve worker mobility.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of creating an enabling environment, which supports
AUKUS initiatives, including workforce mobility between AUKUS nations. The Government passed
the Defence Trade and Controls Amendments Act 2024 which has enabled defence industry across
all three countries to work more seamlessly in a license-free environment, while strengthening
collaboration and making it easier to develop advanced scientific, technological and industrial
capabilities.
The Australian Submarine Agency continues to work with the United States and United Kingdom to
enhance workforce mobility across AUKUS nations. This includes coordinated efforts to ensure visa
settings, skills frameworks, and mobility pathways support the workforce required for AUKUS.
Key initiatives include:
Implementing the Nuclear-Powered Submarine International Placements Program, which places
Australian personnel within US and UK facilities and shipyards to build the specialised skills needed
for Australia’s sovereign nuclear-powered submarine capability.
Progressing trilateral qualifications, licensing, and skills recognition arrangements so that the skills
and competencies gained overseas are recognised and transferable when Australian personnel
return home.
Closely coordinate with relevant agencies responsible for visa settings to support the timely arrival
of UK and US personnel providing critical expertise to the Nuclear-Powered Submarine program.
Recommendation 17
The Committee recommends that as part of the 2026 National Defence Strategy and the
2026 Integrated Investment Program planning cycle, the Australian Government should have due
regard to the role of smaller, low-cost and expendable uncrewed and autonomous systems.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Government’s 2026 National Defence Strategy, ensures that strategy and investment priorities
keep pace with the rapidly evolving strategic environment.
The development and integration of autonomous systems is included as one of the sovereign
defence industrial priorities in the Defence Industry Development Strategy.
Uncrewed and autonomous systems, their payloads and enabling systems are a focus of
AUKUS Pillar II and are being advanced through the Pillar II Maritime Big Play exercise and
experimentation series. Lessons learnt from these activities will drive interoperability, allowing us to
collectively communicate with and use autonomous systems together to deter threats in the Indo-
Pacific region.
9
Recommendation 18
The Committee recommends that the next iteration of the Defence Industry Development Strategy
articulates how the Australian defence industry would be supported to rapidly scale production and
deliver capabilities, including uncrewed and autonomous systems at speed.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
The 2026 Defence Industry Development Strategy (DIDS) will build on the detail in the 2024 DIDS on
support provided to the sovereign defence industrial base and the requirements of our Sovereign
Defence Industrial Priorities, including the development and integration of autonomous systems.
Additionally, the Advanced Strategic Capabilities Accelerator will continue to accelerate delivery of
the most relevant and urgent capability problems by rapidly translating innovative technologies into
capabilities for the ADF.
Recommendation 19
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government ensures regulations of Defence's use of
autonomous systems are fit for purpose and have due regard for international humanitarian law.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
Defence is committed to the responsible use of autonomous systems to achieve the Government’s
National Defence Strategy. Defence develops and uses autonomous systems in compliance with
Australia’s domestic law and international legal obligations, particularly international humanitarian
law, which provides robust governance relevant to Defence’s unique role and operational
requirements.
Defence is also working with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade in support of Australia’s
efforts to build international norms and standards on responsible use of autonomous systems in the
military domain.
Recommendation 20
The Committee recommends that the planning cycle for the 2026 National Defence Strategy puts
due regard on Defence estate security and resilience.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
The National Defence Strategy guides the significant and urgent changes required to transform
Defence’s capability, force posture, acquisition, recruitment and international engagement.
The biennial National Defence Strategy cycle enables the Government to ensure that our strategy
and investment priorities keep pace with the rapidly evolving strategic environment.
10
Recommendation 21
The Committee recommends that the Department of Defence release a public version of the 2023
independent audit into Defence estate as soon as practicable.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
The Government released the Defence Estate Audit on 4 February 2026 and a copy is available at
www.defence.gov.au/about/reviews-inquiries/defence-estate-audit.
Recommendation 22
The Committee recommends the Department of Defence considers how to strengthen fuel security
of Defence estate through the Defence Fuel Resilience Program.
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
In response to the 2023 Defence Strategic Review, and in line with the
2026 National Defence Strategy, the Australian Government is investing between $2.7 and $4.8
billion to improve the resilience of the Defence fuel network, through the Defence Fuel Resilience
Program.
The Defence Fuel Resilience Program will deliver improvements to develop and enhance Defence
fuel holdings, storage and distribution capabilities all over Australia. The Defence Fuel Resilience
Program has established a strategic fuel reserve. The reserve is held at multiple locations across
Australia in both Defence and industry owned storage sites. Since 2022, Defence has doubled its fuel
holdings.
Defence is commencing a number of large fuel infrastructure projects across the Defence fuel
network. This includes building increased storage on the Defence estate in northern Australia.
11
Recommendation 23
The Committee recommends that the Department of Defence works with other departments to
upskill the language capability Defence personnel in languages other than English, with a focus on
languages of Indo-Pacific and Asian languages.
Response:
The Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
Through the Defence Force School of Languages, Defence builds and maintains the language
capability of Defence personnel. In general, Defence can meet its own need for language capability
for a range of required tasks without engagement with other departments. Examples of such tasks
include support to military interoperability during exercises and facilitating Australian Defence
Attaché representational engagement.
Defence acknowledges that engagement with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade has the
potential to provide language immersion opportunities through placement of language students in
environments helpful to consolidating their skills.
Defence has a predominant focus on Asian and Indo-Pacific languages; of the 20 languages taught at
the Defence Force School of Languages, 18 are used in Asia or the Indo-Pacific.
12
