Australian Government response to the Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs References Committee’s Inquiry report:
Current and Proposed Sexual Consent Laws in Australia
AUGUST 2026
Acknowledgement
The Australian Government acknowledges the Traditional Custodians of this Country. We
pay our respects to First Nations peoples past and present, and their continuing connection to
the land, waters, community, and cultures. We also pay our respects to all First Nations
peoples with a lived or living experience of sexual violence.
Content Warning and Support
Sexual violence is a challenging issue. Reading this document may bring up strong feelings.
Free advice and support are available online and via telephone through the following services
(except where indicated, the phonelines below operate 24 hours a day, 7 days a week):
• 1800RESPECT (1800 737 732) National Sexual Assault, Domestic and Family
Violence Counselling Service
• Lifeline (13 11 14) National Crisis Support
• 13YARN (13 92 76) Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander Crisis Support
• Beyond Blue (1300 22 4636) – National crisis support
• Kids Helpline (1800 55 1800) – National crisis support tailored for children and
young people (aged 5 to 25)
• MensLine Australia (1300 78 99 78) – National Crisis support for men
• Blue Knot Foundation (1300 657 380) – National support with complex trauma
• Suicide Call Back Service (1300 659 467) – National crisis support for people
experiencing difficult thoughts
• QLife (1800 184 527) - LGBTI peer support and referral, 3pm – midnight
• Headspace – Mental health and wellbeing support, online service, 9am – 1am (AEST
time)
A copy of this document can be found online at: https://www.ag.gov.au/sexualviolence.
Introduction
The Australian Government is grateful to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs
References Committee (the Committee) for its Inquiry into current and proposed sexual
consent laws in Australia. The Australian Government is committed to an Australia that is
free from sexual violence.
The Australian Government thanks the committee for identifying several areas where
improvements can be made to strengthen the legal frameworks in relation to sexual consent
and to support victim-survivors of sexual violence through clearer processes and better
services. The report makes 17 recommendations. The Government has carefully considered
these recommendations and agrees to one recommendation, agrees in principle to five
recommendations, and notes 11 recommendations.
This whole-of-government response to the Committee’s 17 recommendations was
coordinated by the Attorney-General’s Department (AGD), with contributions from:
Department of Social Services (DSS), Department of Education, the Office for Women in the
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Department of Home Affairs, the
Australian Institute of Criminology (AIC), the Australian Law Reform Commission (ALRC),
the Office of the eSafety Commissioner, Universities Australia and the Domestic, Family and
Sexual Violence Commission (DFSV Commission).
The Australian Government’s response has been endorsed by the Attorney-General,
the Hon Michelle Rowland MP; the Minister for Women, Senator the Hon Katy Gallagher;
the Minister for Education, the Hon Jason Clare MP; the Minister for Social Services,
the Hon Tanya Plibersek MP; the Minister for Communications, the Hon Anika Wells MP
the Minister for Home Affairs, the Hon Tony Burke MP; and the Assistant Minister for
Social Services, the Prevention of Family Violence, the Hon Ged Kearney MP. On
6 August 2026, the Assistant Minister to the Prime Minister, the Hon Patrick Gorman MP
approved the response for tabling in the Federal Parliament.
Together, our response to these recommendations reaffirms the Australian Government’s
ongoing commitment to work collaboratively with states and territories to strengthen and
harmonise laws relating to sexual assault and consent, and to improve justice outcomes for
victim-survivors across Australia. Furthermore, with commitments made under the National
Plan to End Violence against Women and Children 2022-2032, its associated Action Plans
and Our Ways – Strong Ways – Our Voices: National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Plan to End Family, Domestic and Sexual Violence 2026-2036, we affirm our collective
commitment to a country free of gender-based violence – where all people live free from fear
and violence and are safe at home, at work, at school, in the community and online. In
addition, the Australian Government recognises that respectful relationships education is a
key long-term prevention measure to change harmful attitudes and increase understanding on
issues such as consent and healthy, safe relationships.
Australian Government response to the recommendations of the Inquiry report
Committee Recommendation Government Response
1 5.7 The Committee recommends The Australian Government agrees to recommendation 1.
that, in all responses to sexual
violence, governments and The foundation of the Australian Government’s strategy to address domestic,
non-government organisations family and sexual violence (DFSV) is demonstrated in the National Plan to End
ensure that the agency of Violence against Women and Children 2022-32 (the National Plan) and will also be
victim-survivors is paramount, demonstrated in the Our Ways – Strong Ways – Our Voices: National Aboriginal
actively respected and upheld. and Torres Strait Islander Plan to End Family, Domestic and Sexual Violence (Our
Ways – Strong Ways – Our Voices, previously known as the First Nations National
Plan). These strategies set the national policy agenda guiding the work of
Commonwealth, state and territory governments, family safety experts, and
front-line services.
The experiences of victim-survivors are an essential and guiding focus in the
development and implementation of the National Plan, and its underpinning Action
Plans, in line with the National Plan’s cross-cutting principle that policies and
programs are informed by the diverse lived experiences of victim-survivors. The
National Plan recognises that victim-survivors should be at the heart of solutions
because of their specific and contextual expertise that comes from lived experience
of abuse and violence.
The voices and lived-experiences of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
victim- survivors will guide the development of Our Ways – Strong Ways – Our
Voices. Consultations have been completed which included dedicated consultations
focused on sexual violence with victim-survivors, and their advocates.
Victim-survivors and their advocates were represented on the three expert advisory
bodies established by DSS to advise the Australian Government and inform
development of the National Plan and underpinning Action Plans: the National Plan
4
Committee Recommendation Government Response
Advisory Group, the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Advisory Council on
family, domestic and sexual violence and the Our Ways – Strong Ways – Our
Voices Steering Committee.
Formal mechanisms for ongoing engagement with victim-survivors at the national
level have also been developed by the DFSV Commission. The DFSV Commission
has established a national Lived Experience Advisory Council to amplify the voices
of people with lived or living experience of DFSV. The Lived Experience Advisory
Council provides advice to the DFSV Commission to help improve DFSV policies,
systems and services, and monitor implementation and progress towards the
objectives of the National Plan.
Further, on 23 January 2024, the Australian Government announced the
establishment of a sexual violence lived experience Expert Advisory Group (EAG)
for two-years to ensure the views and voices of victim-survivors were centred
throughout the 12-month ALRC inquiry into justice responses to sexual violence,
and in the Australian Government’s consideration of its recommendations. On
6 March 2025, coinciding with the tabling of the ALRC’s inquiry report: Safe,
Informed, Supported: Reforming Justice Responses to Sexual Violence (the ALRC
report), the Australian Government announced a $21.4 million initial funding
package as part of a phased response to the ALRC’s report. The funding package
includes $1.2 million to extend the scope and duration of the EAG to provide
advice to the Australian Government on responses to, and implementation of, the
ALRC’s recommendations, and for other targeted consultation to inform
longer-term responses to the ALRC report.
5
Committee Recommendation Government Response
2 5.17 The Committee recommends The Australian Government notes recommendation 2.
that Australian jurisdictions that
have recently legislated an Building a shared evidence base to inform future policy and law reforms aligns
affirmative consent model, design with key national priorities under the SCAG Work Plan to Strengthen Criminal
and implement a framework for Justice Responses to Sexual Assault 2022-27 (SCAG Work Plan).
the evaluation of that standard,
with outcomes to be reported to The Australian Government notes that apart from its limited responsibility for
the Standing Council of sexual offences, the states and territories have primary responsibility for the
Attorneys-General and the legislation and legal frameworks relating to sexual violence, including the legal
Australian Law Reform definition of consent. Design and implementation of an evaluation framework for a
Commission, to inform all legislated affirmative consent model is a matter for each state and territory
Australian governments about the government.
impacts of an affirmative consent
model in sexual consent laws and The ALRC report recommends that jurisdictions that have recently adopted
to assist the Australian Law affirmative models of consent, or that are proposing to do so, should evaluate these
Reform Commission in reforms within five years of the reforms commencing (including Tasmania, which
conducting its review process has had an affirmative model of consent since 2004 and should conduct a review
(referred to below).1 within a reasonable timeframe). The ALRC recommends that SCAG commission,
and ensure appropriate funding for, the AIC to prepare the evaluation criteria and
conduct the evaluation. The AIC should provide the results of the evaluation to
SCAG to consider the adoption of a nationally harmonised affirmative model of
consent.
Responses to the ALRC’s recommendations are still being considered, including
under the auspices of SCAG, and are being informed by targeted stakeholder
consultations, including continued engagement with the EAG, other sectoral
stakeholders and states and territories.
1 Refer to recommendation 4, Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee, Inquiry into Current and proposed sexual consent laws in Australia.
6
Committee Recommendation Government Response
3 5.18 The Committee recommends The Australian Government notes recommendation 3.
that state and territory evaluations
of the impact of affirmative The Australian Government is leading national efforts to improve justice system
consent models is an annual responses to sexual violence, including by partnering with the states and territories
standing item on the agenda of the to improve victim-survivors’ experiences through the existing program of work
Standing Council of under the auspices of the SCAG Work Plan.
Attorneys-General
The Australian Government notes that outcomes from implementing
recommendation 3 will be primarily dependent on the states and territories’
agreement to, and implementation of, recommendation 2. The Australian
Government further notes that standing agenda items are subject to the agreement
of all SCAG participants.
4 5.29 The Committee recommends The Australian Government notes recommendation 4.
that the Australian Law Reform
Commission includes an The Commonwealth Attorney-General directed the ALRC to consider this
affirmative consent standard in Committee’s report and recommendations as part of the terms of reference for the
any proposal to harmonise Commission’s inquiry into justice responses to sexual assault, including
Australia’s sexual consent laws consideration of recommendation 4.
and taking into account the
evidence of the operation of The ALRC inquiry commenced on 22 January 2024 and concluded with the final
recently adopted affirmative report being tabled on 6 March 2025.
consent laws.
Recommendation 35 of the ALRC’s report provides that jurisdictions that have
recently adopted affirmative models of consent, or that are proposing to do so,
should evaluate these reforms within five years of the reforms commencing
(including Tasmania, which has had an affirmative model of consent since 2004
and should also conduct a review within a reasonable timeframe) to ensure that a
best practice affirmative model of consent is identified for the purposes of national
harmonisation.
7
Committee Recommendation Government Response
5 5.30 The Committee recommends The Australian Government notes recommendation 5.
that the Commonwealth
Government responds to On 22 January 2025, the ALRC concluded its 12-month inquiry into justice
recommendations made by the responses to sexual violence. The ALRC’s report was tabled on 6 March 2025. The
Australian Law Reform report makes 64 inter-related recommendations that are expansive and complex,
Commission, within six months of recommending substantial reforms which cut across all jurisdictions’ criminal and
the Commission presenting its civil justice systems, including service delivery networks.
report.
On 6 March 2025, as part of a phased response to the ALRC’s report, the
Government announced $21.4 million (over 3 years) to provide immediate, targeted
action to improve access to the justice system for victim-survivors. The measures
will also further strengthen the evidence base to help pave the way for longer term
systemic changes.
In recognition of the complexity of the recommendations, the
Australian Government is engaging broadly with stakeholders to inform the
development of longer-term responses to the recommendations. This includes
consultation with states and territories under the auspices of the SCAG, and with
sectoral and expert stakeholders, including the EAG. Responding to the ALRC’s
recommendations will require careful calibration to balance the needs of
victim- survivors while upholding the rule of law and principles of procedural
fairness and right to a fair trial for the accused.
Responding to the ALRC’s report will build on and complement the Australian
Attorney-General Department’s leadership to improve the way the justice system
deals with sexual violence through the existing program of work under the SCAG
Work Plan and initiatives under the National Plan.
6 5.36 The Committee recommends The Australian Government agrees in principle to recommendation 6.
that the Commonwealth
government provides ongoing The Australian Government recognises data and research are crucial to
funding for research into the understanding the prevalence of sexual violence, evaluating the efficacy of
8
Committee Recommendation Government Response
prevalence of sexual violence in responses and interventions, and informing future initiatives to improve criminal
Australia and the impact of justice systems. The Australian Government also recognises that universities and
responses to it, including through peak bodies have a role in funding research pertinent to safety and wellbeing of
regular surveys of students their students.
(including those living in
university residences) and young Under the National Plan, the Australian Government is funding a range of surveys
people. and research that will contribute to building the evidence base on the nature and
extent of sexual violence victimisation and perpetration in Australia.
The following actions of the First Action Plan 2023-2027 under the National Plan
directly relate to this recommendation:
• Action 2: Improve the national evidence base by working towards
consistent terminology and monitoring and evaluation frameworks, and by
strengthening collection and sharing of data and evidence, and
• Action 6: Improve action to prevent and address sexual violence and
harassment in all settings, across the four domains of the National Plan.
The Australian Government is funding a range of initiatives that will contribute to
the response to this recommendation including:
• the Australian Bureau of Statistics Personal Safety Survey (PSS) which
provides national prevalence rates on sexual violence and sexual
harassment in Australia (including for young people).
• the first National LGBTIQA+ Sexual Violence Survey, undertaken by the
University of New South Wales. This builds on PSS data and provides
information on prevalence rates, social norms, attitudes, beliefs, bystander
actions, and help-seeking behaviours in LGBTIQA+ communities.
• the National Community Attitudes towards Violence against Women
Survey referenced in the Committee’s report, to be delivered by Australia’s
National Research Organisation for Women’s Safety (ANROWS).
Additional funding for ANROWS through the National Priority Research
Fund may also include further research on sexual violence.
9
Committee Recommendation Government Response
• interactive dashboards on DFSV data in Australia delivered by the
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW). The AIHW has also
developed a website to host DFSV data and reports.
• engagement of the Australian Human Rights Commission (AHRC) to
deliver a national survey to explore secondary school students’
understanding and experience of consent and respectful relationships
education.
• a second wave of the Australian Child Maltreatment Study which provides
evidence on the prevalence, nature, and impact of all five forms of child
maltreatment, including child sexual abuse.
The Australian Government also funds the AIC which undertakes and disseminates
research on crime and justice through its core appropriation. Family, domestic and
sexual violence is one of AIC’s seven current research priorities. As part of its
Family, Domestic and Sexual Violence Research Program, it is undertaking a
number of research projects into sexual violence, including research to understand
the relationship between pornography use and other online activities and sexual
violence, research into alternative reporting processes for sexual violence, and
research examining restorative justice measures for domestic, family and sexual
violence. Additionally, the Australian Sexual Offence Statistical (ASOS) collection
was established by the AIC to monitor the extent and nature of sexual offending
across the country. The collection brings together police-recorded data on sexual
offences for which one or more offenders were proceeded against, as well as the
characteristics of alleged offenders and victims. The AIC received funding under
the Proceeds of Crime Act 2002 (Cth) for a pilot project to establish the ASOS
collection and has since extended the project.
The Australian Government also funds the eSafety Commissioner, who has the
legislated core function to undertake research under the Online Safety Act 2021
(Cth). A central objective of eSafety’s research program is to generate robust,
person-centred evidence on the prevalence, nature and impact of online harms in
10
Committee Recommendation Government Response
the Australian community. This includes dedicated research into
technology-facilitated forms of sexual violence, informed by national surveys,
analysis of data from eSafety’s reporting schemes and collaboration with external
subject matter experts. Current and planned research streams include examination
of the scope and context of online sexual harassment, online grooming type
behaviours, image-based abuse and sexual extortion. This research aims to
strengthen the evidence base to inform prevention, policy, regulatory and service
responses, and to ensure that stakeholders have access to timely, actionable insights
into forms of technology facilitated sexual violence.
The Australian Government notes recommendation 6 also aligns with Priority 3.1
of the SCAG Work Plan, which focuses on strengthening national datasets, sharing
research and learnings, and the commissioning of academic research where needed
to build a shared evidence base that informs best practice policy development,
implementation and evaluation.
The Australian Government also notes the commitment of Universities Australia to
conduct a redesigned National Student Safety Survey (NSSS), and notes that
Universities Australia should continue to play a role in the survey of students on the
prevalence of sexual violence.
7 5.43 The Committee recommends The Australian Government notes recommendation 7.
that state and territory
governments, in collaboration While this recommendation is for the consideration of state and territory
with relevant stakeholders, governments, the Australian Government notes the risk of re-traumatisation that
develop and deliver materials to victim-survivors may experience when appropriate guidance and information is not
provide people who report sexual provided throughout the criminal justice process. The ways that victim-survivors
assaults with appropriate guidance are supported and guided through the criminal justice system also varies across
and information, including: jurisdictions. The Australian Government recognises the importance of
• an explanation of how a collaboration to ensure that victim-survivors receive appropriate guidance and
complaint will be information at every stage of the criminal justice process.
investigated;
11
Committee Recommendation Government Response
• an explanation of how the Recommendation 20 of the ALRC’s report recommends that federal, state and
criminal justice system territory police agencies, the Offices of the Director of Public Prosecutions and
operates; state and territory courts ensure their online information on processes about sexual
• the purpose of giving offence matters:
evidence-in-chief and a. is easy to find
cross examination; b. explains to complainants what they can expect from the process
• the level of detail required c. provides information about all trauma-informed and culturally-informed
for evidential purposes; processes, including the availability of flexible evidence measures
and d. is accessible to screen readers
• the obligation on the e. is available in an accessible format, including in easy read and audio or
video format with captioning
accused’s legal
f. is available in multiple languages
representative to challenge
g. is kept up to date.
evidence.
Longer term responses to the ALRC’s recommendations are being considered,
including under the auspices of the SCAG, and are being informed by targeted
stakeholder consultations, including continued engagement with the EAG, other
sectoral stakeholders and states and territories.
The Australian Government further notes recommendation 7 aligns with Priorities
1.2 and 1.3 of the SCAG Work Plan, which focus on strengthening evidence
admissibility and increasing procedural protections for vulnerable witnesses,
including victim-survivors giving evidence in criminal proceedings.
12
Committee Recommendation Government Response
8 5.45 The Committee recommends The Australian Government agrees in principle to recommendation 8.
that the Commonwealth
government assess the success of The Australian Government recognises the importance of evaluating the success of
pilot projects for specialised and the specialised and trauma-informed sexual assault legal services pilot. An outcome
trauma-informed legal services from the pilot will include evidence about the impact of the specialised and
and, if successful, fund an trauma-informed legal services for victim-survivors, which will support future
expansion of the provision of such policy development and service delivery, and build sector capacity.
services for the benefit of
victim-survivors. In initial response to the ALRC’s report, the Australian Government announced a
$19.6 million national expansion of the legal services pilot over three years from
2025-26 to all 8 states and territories, in addition to an expansion of the services
being trialled under the pilot, and evaluation. Between November 2025 and May
2026, the Australian Government progressively established the legal services pilots
across all states and territories, completing the national expansion.
9 5.52 The Committee recommends The Australian Government notes recommendation 9.
that the state and territory
governments consider establishing While this recommendation is for the consideration of state and territory
a restorative justice pilot program governments, the Australian Government recognises alternative justice approaches
and a specialist sexual violence to sexual violence, including restorative justice and specialist court approaches,
court pilot for sexual offending, to offer potential benefits for victim-survivors who choose to utilise such pathways.
explore more sensitive and The Australian Government further notes the importance of evaluating new policies
trauma-informed approaches to and programs to build on existing research and data, consistent with Priority 3.1 of
sexual violence in the criminal the SCAG Work Plan.
justice system.
The Attorney-General’s Department and the Australasian Institute of Judicial
Administration (AIJA) jointly engaged the Central Queensland University College
of Law and Queensland Centre for Domestic and Family Violence Research to
undertake research throughout 2022 and 2023, which culminated in the October
2023 publication, Specialist Approaches to Managing Sexual Assault Proceedings:
an Integrative Review.
13
Committee Recommendation Government Response
The AIC has completed a detailed evaluation of Phase Three of the ACT’s
Restorative Justice Scheme, which involved the expansion of the Scheme to include
domestic, family and sexual violence. Further research has also examined referral
processes for domestic, family and sexual violence matters into restorative justice
programs, and victim-survivor perspectives on the operation of these programs.
As part of an initial phased response to the ALRC’s report, the Australian
Government announced $19.6 million funding in the 2025-26 Budget for a national
expansion of the specialised and trauma-informed sexual assault legal services
pilot. The scope of services under the pilot were also expanded to include support
to access restorative justice pathways.
10 5.59 The Committee recommends The Australian Government agrees in principle to recommendation 10.
that the Commonwealth
government, through the Police As noted in the Committee’s report, the Australian Government committed
Ministers Council, develops $4.1 million over four years from 2022-23 to enhance the effectiveness of police
principles to guide ongoing responses to family, domestic and sexual violence (FDSV) through the
specialist education and training development and delivery of a national training and education package, as a
to state and territory law measure under the National Plan to End Violence against Women and Children
enforcement officers, to ensure 2022 - 2032. The package builds on existing training in the states and territories,
culturally appropriate and seeking to enhance law enforcement’s response through increasing awareness of
trauma-informed responses to coercive control as a dynamic that almost always underpins family and domestic
victim-survivors of sexual assault. violence, and improving recognition of indicators to identify subtler FDSV
behaviours, including through the use of technology facilitated abuse. It will also
include content on culturally safe policing.
The AIC completed a review of existing literature on police training in responding
to family, domestic and sexual violence to underpin the design of training. A
Project Manager, Training and Education Designer, Evaluation Organisation and an
Aboriginal Community-Controlled Organisation have been engaged to be part of
14
Committee Recommendation Government Response
the development of the training package. The eSafety Commissioner is providing
expertise and developing content on technology facilitated abuse. An academic
institution was engaged to undertake community focused consultation with people
with lived experience to contribute to areas of focus and case studies for the
training, and a team of FDSV specialists have been engaged to co-facilitate the
training with police nationally.
This training package commenced rollout on 28 April 2026 in South Australia.
The Australian Government continues to advocate for the development of specialist
education and training for law enforcement in FDSV through its leadership on the
Police Ministers Council. The Australian Government recognises that the
development and delivery of culturally appropriate and trauma-informed training is
essential and will consider whether further action can be taken in relation to this
recommendation as the existing training measures progress.
Chapter 7 of the ALRC’s final report makes several recommendations in relation to
people who work in the criminal justice system or who have relevant involvement
in sexual violence matters including judicial officers, court staff, prosecutors and
in-house witness assistance officers, defence lawyers, and police officers. The
ALRC recommends that those who work in the criminal justice system or who have
relevant involvement in sexual violence matters should receive education about
myths and misconceptions and training about trauma-informed and culturally safe
practices.
The ALRC also recommends that police agencies be mandated and funded to
ensure all police officers receive this education and training, but that it also be
tailored to reflect the tasks performed by specialist police officers and general duty
police officers (recommendation 12).
15
Committee Recommendation Government Response
The Government is carefully considering the ALRC’s report and will work closely
with states and territories, experts and people with lived experience through the
EAG to consider longer-term responses.
11 5.69 The Committee recommends The Australian Government agrees in principle to recommendation 11.
that the Attorney-General’s
Department, in collaboration with The Australian Government recognises sexual violence occurs in contexts other
the Australasian Institute of than family and domestic violence, and these contexts give rise to distinct social
Judicial Administration and other and legal issues.
relevant stakeholders, develops
and delivers a National Sexual The Australian Government will commence consultations with AIJA and other
Violence Bench Book, to assist relevant stakeholders to explore options to develop and deliver guidance to assist
judicial officers to recognise and judicial officers to recognise and respond to sexual violence in a culturally
respond to sexual violence in a appropriate and trauma-informed manner. Consultations with AIJA will consider
culturally appropriate and trauma- options to develop a new National Sexual Violence Bench Book or to expand the
informed manner. This resource existing National Domestic and Family Violence Bench Book to specifically
should specifically address rape address matters related to sexual violence, including rape myths and
myths and misconceptions. misconceptions. Outcomes will require additional resources and will be subject to
future funding agreements.
The Australian Government notes the existing National Domestic and Family
Violence Bench Book raises commentary on sexual violence in the context of
family and domestic violence or intimate partner relationships. Examples include:
• Section 4.1 - Myths and misunderstandings: addresses the myth that
domestic and family violence does not include sexual assault.
• Section 3.1.2 - Sexual and reproductive abuse: summarises sexual abuse
and the types of behaviours that may occur.
• Chapter 9 - Responses to the criminal justice system: considers the
treatment of bail, evidence and sentencing in offences committed in the
context of domestic and family violence or where there has been intimate
partner abuse.
16
Committee Recommendation Government Response
• The case database includes some criminal and family law cases that
consider sexual violence in the context of family and domestic violence or
an existing or past intimate partner relationship.
As noted at paragraph 5.67 of the Committee’s report, chapter 5 of the National
Domestic and Family Violence Bench Book titled Fair hearing and safety,
discusses the courtroom experiences of victim-survivors of family and domestic
violence, which are issues which could also apply to victim-survivors of sexual
violence.
As noted at paragraph 3.83 of the Committee’s report, the Australian Government
committed $12.6 million over five years from 2022-23 for the delivery of domestic,
family and sexual violence education and training for frontline workers, health
professionals and the justice sector. This included $1.1 million for the
Attorney-General’s Department to develop and deliver a new national justice sector
education and training package on the nature and impacts on sexual assault. As part
of this package, the Attorney-General’s Department engaged the Australian
Institute of Family Studies (AIFS) which has developed and delivered a national
foundational education resource on sexual assault myths and misconceptions. The
resource improves knowledge and understanding in the justice sector about the
dynamics of sexual assault and its impacts on victims, and the dispelling of
common myths and misconceptions. It was informed by consultation with a range
of key stakeholders including specialised professionals in the justice system, sexual
assault service providers, peak bodies and advocacy organisations, and key experts.
The resource was completed in June 2024 and was published online in
December 2024. To further improve the judiciary’s understanding of the nature and
impact of sexual violence, the Attorney-General’s Department also separately
engaged the National Judicial College of Australia (NJCA) and AIJA to deliver a
national judicial training package and national judicial conference in 2024,
respectively.
17
Committee Recommendation Government Response
12 5.73 The Committee recommends The Australian Government notes recommendation 12.
that the Australian Law Reform
Commission considers whether The Commonwealth Attorney-General directed the ALRC to have reference to this
model jury directions should be Committee’s report and recommendations as part of the Commission’s terms of
developed as part of any initiative reference for its inquiry into justice responses to sexual assault.
to harmonise Australia’s sexual
consent laws. This model should In its report, the ALRC recommends SCAG establish an appropriately funded
include express requirements as to expert multi-disciplinary working group to produce a model bill containing jury
the timing and circumstances in directions to address myths and misconceptions in sexual offence trials, to be
which jury directions must be enacted by each state and territory (the Model Jury Directions Bill).
given.
Recommendation 22 of the ALRC’s report also recommends the NJCA, the AIJA,
the Judicial College of Victoria, and the Judicial Commission of New South Wales,
in collaboration with relevant experts, be funded to publish a National Judicial
Bench Book to support and complement the Model Jury Directions Bill
recommended under recommendation 21 of the ALRC’s report.
The Government is carefully considering the ALRC’s report and will work closely
with states and territories, experts and people with lived experience through the
EAG to consider longer-term responses.
18
13 5.85 The Committee recommends The Australian Government agrees in principle to recommendation 13.
that the Commonwealth
government, through the Respectful Relationships Education
Education Ministers Meeting and Version 9.0 of the Australian Curriculum was endorsed by all education ministers
in consultation with relevant on 1 April 2022. The Health and Physical Education (HPE) is the main curriculum
stakeholders, develops a strategy area for addressing respectful relationships education and this content was updated
and delivers funding (in and strengthened by the explicit inclusion of the skills and understandings required
conjunction with the states and for respectfully seeking, giving and denying consent in an age-appropriate way.
territories) for upskilling the
education workforce, to achieve This recommendation will be addressed through implementation of the Australian
the consistent and effective Government’s Consent and Respectful Relationships Education (CRRE)
delivery of comprehensive $83.5 million Budget measure, which is underway. Through this measure, funding
Respectful Relationships of $77.6 million over five years (from June 2024) will be provided to states and
Education in Australian schools. territories and the non-government school sector to support schools to deliver age
This should include consideration appropriate, evidence-based and expert-developed CRRE. Eligible activities
of mandatory education in the include upskilling the education workforce through professional learning and
Initial Teacher Education development, including supporting the implementation of whole school approaches
Curriculum. to support the delivery of respectful relationships education, including through
quality third party providers.
The Monash Gender and Family Violence Prevention Centre, Monash University,
completed a Rapid Review of how consent and respectful relationships education
programs are currently being taught in schools, and has supported the initial
development of the National RRE Framework, including through completing a
rapid review on current RRE delivery, literature review, and initial consultations.
The Department of Education has finalised the Framework in consultation with
relevant stakeholders nationally, and the Framework was publicly released on
11 March 2026. The Framework will provide guidance for schools and school
systems on the planning and delivery of age-appropriate, evidence based and
expert-developed RRE.
19
Initial Teacher Education Curriculum
Under the nationally-agreed Accreditation of Initial Teacher Education Programs:
Standards and Procedures, Initial Teacher Education (ITE) programs must prepare
ITE students for the school curriculum and learning areas of their chosen discipline
and/or stage of schooling. This includes the respectful relationships and consent
education components of the Australian Curriculum version 9.0.
The December 2023 addendum to the Accreditation Standards and Procedures
mandated core content must be embedded into ITE programs by the end of 2025.
The core content is evidence-based and covers what every teacher should learn to
be prepared for the classroom and best support students. In October 2024,
Education Ministers Meeting agreed to commence work to embed Respectful
Relationships training in ITE programs.
14 5.87 The Committee recommends The Australian Government notes recommendation 14.
that the Commonwealth
government considers ongoing The Australian Government is delivering on its commitment to get all government
funding as a National Partnership schools on a pathway to full and fair funding. Through the Better and Fairer
Payment, to sufficiently resource Schools Agreements, signed by all states and territories, the Government will
those elements of Australian deliver an additional $16.5 billion over ten years for public schools – getting all
Curriculum 9.0 that provide for schools in the country to the Schooling Resource Standard.
Respectful Relationships
Education, including through a The Australian Government is supporting schools to deliver evidence-based,
strategic investment in workforce age-appropriate and expert-developed consent and respectful relationships
development. Particular education in primary and secondary schools through the Consent and Respectful
consideration should be given to Relationships Education initiative (see the Australian Government’s response to
addressing long-standing concerns Recommendation 13 for further information):
about under-funding in public • $77.6 million will be provided to support school sectors to invest in high
schools and the need to quality, age-appropriate, consent-based respectful relationships education
additionally resource specialist and protective behaviour programs in primary and secondary schools.
third-party providers. • This initiative is being guided by the National Respectful Relationships
Education Expert Working Group in collaboration with experts and
20
representatives from state and territory governments, the National Catholic
Education Commission and Independent Schools Australia.
Version 9.0 of the Australian Curriculum was endorsed by all education ministers
on 1 April 2022. The Health and Physical Education is the main curriculum area for
addressing respectful relationships education, and this content was updated and
strengthened by explicit inclusion of the skills and understandings required for
respectfully seeking, giving and denying consent in an age-appropriate way. The
Personal, Social and Community Health focus area includes content about
respectful relationships, including negotiating consent, managing relationships
online and offline, and dealing with relationships when there is an imbalance of
power.
The Australian Curriculum Version 9.0 includes Curriculum Connections that
support educators to see the relationships across the curriculum across various
themes, including Online Safety and Respectful Relationships. The Online Safety
resource was developed in consultation with the eSafety Commissioner and the
Respectful Relationships was developed in collaboration with Our Watch.
15 5.97 The Committee recommends The Australian Government notes recommendation 15.
that Universities Australia
conducts a second National The Australian Government notes the commitment of Universities Australia to
Student Safety Survey, with conduct a redesigned National Student Safety Survey building on the 2016 and
survey results made publicly 2021 NSSS surveys. Data and research are crucial to understanding the prevalence
available no later than 2025, and of sexual violence in the higher education sector and students’ experiences of
commits to conducting a national support and reporting pathways.
student safety survey on an
ongoing basis every three years, As part of the Action Plan Addressing Gender-based Violence in Higher Education,
to provide all stakeholders with agreed to by all Education Ministers on 23 February 2024, the Australian
up-to-date and accurate Government introduced legislation to establish a National Higher Education Code
information about sexual violence to Prevent and Respond to Gender-based Violence (National Code). On
on campus. This survey should 25 August 2025, the legislation passed the Australian Parliament. The legislation is
encompass students of all ages on a key step to enable the Minister for Education to make the National Code and to
21
campus, including 17-year-old set the standards and requirements that higher education providers, registered with
students who are at no less risk of the Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Agency, must meet to proactively
sexual harm by virtue of not yet prevent and respond to gender-based violence.
being 18.
16 5.119 The Committee The Australian Government notes Recommendation 16.
recommends that the
Commonwealth government In response to Priority Action 5 of the Australian Universities Accord Review
implements an independent Panel’s Interim Report, in August 2023 the Australian Government established a
taskforce with strong powers, to cross-jurisdictional Working Group to provide advice on concrete actions to
oversight universities’ policies strengthen university governance, with addressing sexual assault and sexual
and practices to prevent and harassment as an urgent priority.
respond to sexual violence on
campus and in residences. The On Friday 23 February 2024, Education Ministers agreed to the Action Plan
Committee recommends that the Addressing Gender-based Violence in Higher Education (Action Plan).
taskforce provides:
• an effective and accessible The Action Plan was developed in close consultation with states and territories and
complaints process; with victim-survivor advocates, student leaders, subject matter experts, staff
• meaningful accountability for representatives, student accommodation providers and the higher education sector.
both universities and Public consultation occurred between November 2023 and January 2024.
residences if standards are not
met; and The Action Plan is a multi-pronged approach with seven key actions to drive
• transparency around which change. These include:
institutions are providing 1. the establishment of a National Student Ombudsman
appropriate and effective 2. that higher education providers must implement a whole-of-organisation
responses and prevention approach to prevent and respond to gender-based violence
initiatives. 3. the introduction of a National Higher Education Code to Prevent and
Respond to Gender-based Violence (National Code)
22
4. enhancing the oversight and accountability of student accommodation
providers
5. further work to identify opportunities to ensure legislation, policies and
regulations enable providers to prioritise victim-survivor safety
6. increasing data transparency and scrutiny
7. regular review of progress against the Action Plan.
Through the 2024-25 Budget, the Australian Government committed $19.4 million
over two years from 2024-25 to establish the National Student Ombudsman as an
ongoing function (Action 1 under the Action Plan) and $18.7 million over four
years from 2024-25 to introduce the National Code (Action 3 under the Action
Plan).
The National Student Ombudsman commenced operation on 1 February 2025 and
provides a dedicated and trauma-informed escalated complaints pathway for all
higher education students.
A draft of the National Code was tabled in Parliament on 6 February 2025, and on
25 August 2025 the Universities Accord (National Higher Education Code to
Prevent and Respond to Gender-based Violence) Act 2025 (Act No. 34 of 2025) and
the Universities Accord (National Higher Education Code to Prevent and Respond
to Gender-based Violence) (Consequential Amendments) Act 2025 (Act No. 35 of
2025) passed parliament and received Royal Assent on 28 August 2025. This
legislation enabled the Minister for Education to formally make the National Code
on 17 October 2025.
The National Code sets mandatory requirements across seven standards that higher
education providers registered with the Tertiary Education Quality and Standards
Agency (TEQSA), must meet to prevent and respond to gender-based violence,
including in student accommodation.
23
The National Code will fill gaps in the current regulatory architecture for student
and staff safety to reduce the incidence of gender-based violence and ensure higher
education providers’ study, work, living and social environments are safe,
respectful and inclusive. The National Code recognises the unique role that higher
education providers must play in driving broader social change to address
gender-based violence, and the distinct responsibilities they hold in relation to
creating safe study, work, social and living environments.
The National Code came into effect on 1 January 2026 for providers that are Table
A Providers and Table B Providers under the Higher Education Support Act 2003
(Cth), and from 1 January 2027 it will commence for all other Providers registered
under the Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Agency Act 2011 (Cth).
The National Code will be regulated by a new specialist branch established in the
Department of Education, the Higher Education Gender-based Violence Regulator
(GBV Regulator). The GBV Regulator will conduct targeted compliance, support
providers through education and engagement across the sector, and collect annual
data on gender-based violence in higher education. The GBV Regulator will work
closely with the National Student Ombudsman and TEQSA to ensure a coordinated
approach.
17 5.121 The Committee The Australian Government notes Recommendation 17.
recommends that the
Commonwealth government The Australian Universities Accord Panel has undertaken a holistic review of
commissions an independent Australia’s higher education system to drive lasting and transformational reform
review of the Tertiary Education across the sector. As part of that review, the Accord Panel considered the
Quality and Standards Agency’s regulatory system. The Accord Panel found TEQSA has been successful in
response to sexual violence on establishing a set of minimum standards and enforcing a baseline for provider
university campuses. behaviour, but its powers need to be reviewed regularly and adjusted as necessary
to allow it to become an agile and forward-leaning regulator. The Accord Panel
provided its final report to the Australian Government in December 2023. The
24
Minister for Education announced the Australian Government’s intent to consult on
strengthening TEQSA’s powers on 19 August 2025.
As noted in response to Recommendation 16, the Australian Government is taking
urgent action to address these issues through the Action Plan Addressing
Gender-based Violence in Higher Education (Action Plan) as agreed to by
Education Ministers.
The Action Plan includes the establishment of a National Student Ombudsman and
a new National Higher Education Code to Prevent and Respond to Gender-based
Violence.
25
