Australian Government response to the
Joint Select Committee on Northern Australia: Final
Report on the Cyclone Reinsurance Pool
August 2026

Introduction
The Australian Government acknowledges the Final Report of the Joint Select Committee on Northern
Australia (the Committee) on the operation and implementation of the Cyclone Reinsurance Pool
(cyclone pool).
The Committee was appointed by resolution of the Senate on 3 August 2022 and resolution of the
House of Representatives on 4 August 2022 to inquire into and report on matters relating to the
development of Northern Australia, as may be referred to it by either House of the Parliament or a
Minister.
On 11 October 2022, the then Assistant Treasurer and Minister for Financial Services, the Hon Stephen
Jones MP referred to the Committee to inquire into and report on the operation and implementation
of the Cyclone Reinsurance Pool.
The Committee held public hearings on 25 November 2022, 19 April 2024 and 7 February 2025. The
Committee tabled its Final Report in March 2025.
The Australian Government commenced a review of the Terrorism and Cyclone Insurance Act 2003 on
30 September 2025, which includes the cyclone reinsurance pool. Treasury will provide a report to the
Government in due course.
The Australian Government’s response to the final report reflects that the statutory review of the Act
is ongoing and has had regard to some of the report’s recommendations. Consideration is also
ongoing as to how best to tackle the interrelated issues of rising natural hazard risk and insurance
affordability, in the context of the Australian Government’s other priorities such as its housing agenda.
The Australian Government has implemented several reforms related to these policy areas, including:
• Establishing the Disaster Ready Fund, to deliver $1 billion over 5 years from 1 July 2023 on
projects to support communities to reduce risks and better prepare for natural hazards. This
flagship program is ensuring that Australia is better prepared and more resilient in the face of
more intense and more frequent weather events.
• Founding the Hazards Insurance Partnership, to facilitate insights between the insurance
industry and Government and create a shared understanding of natural hazard risk and
appropriate risk reduction measures across Australia.
• Forming the Insurance Affordability and Natural Hazard Risk Reduction Taskforce (IANHRRT), led
by the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, to advise on measures that could help reduce
risk and improve insurance affordability and coverage.
The Government is considering the advice of IANHRRT and working with relevant agencies and
stakeholders on how it can further improve natural hazard risk and insurance affordability.
The Government is also undertaking measures to improve consumer outcomes in home insurance.
The Government announced as part of Budget 2026-27 that it will develop and consult on options to
improve clarity around the basis of home and contents premiums and it will legislate standard
definitions of natural hazard terms used in property insurance contracts.
Introduction | 1
Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government must proceed with the planned
legislated review of the Cyclone Reinsurance Pool in 2025.
Australian Government response
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
The Australian Government commenced a review of the Terrorism and Cyclone Insurance Act
2003 on 30 September 2025, which includes the cyclone reinsurance pool. Treasury will provide a
report to the Government in due course.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government publish modelling on the cost and
benefits of the inclusion of marine insurance in the Cyclone Reinsurance Pool.
Australian Government response
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
In September 2025, the Government announced that small business marine property insurance
policies will not be included in the cyclone pool because modelling shows it would have a
negligible impact on affordability and potentially lead to an increase in costs. The Australian
Government published modelling to support this decision.
Recommendation 3
The Committee strongly recommends that the Australian Government support an ongoing, national
resilience program on a permanent basis.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider a range of measures to
improve resilience and mitigation of high-risk homes in Northern Australia, including:
• providing targeted tax offsets for eligible households in Northern Australia; and
• providing direct subsidies to eligible households in Northern Australia.
Australian Government response
The Australian Government notes these recommendations.
The Australian Government established the Disaster Ready Fund to deliver $1 billion over 5 years
from 1 July 2023 on projects to support communities to reduce risks and better prepare for
natural hazards.
2 | Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, in its insurance
monitoring role, investigate the impact of current taxation methods on insurance premium pricing.
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government fund the Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission to continue its insurance monitoring role until at least 2030.
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government fund and expand the remit of the
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission to examine the extent to which insurers are
reducing insurance premiums in response to mitigation and resilience measures.
Australian Government response
The Australian Government notes these recommendations.
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC) has been directed to monitor the
prices, costs, and profits of home, contents, strata, and certain commercial insurance policies,
before and after the cyclone reinsurance pool was introduced.
The ACCC collects data and information from insurers to:
• evaluate the impact of the cyclone reinsurance pool
• assess whether savings are passed through to policy holders.
The ACCC is required to provide a report on its monitoring at least once each calendar year from
1 January 2022 to 30 June 2026.
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government publish the report of the 2025
scheduled review into the Terrorism and Cyclone Insurance Act 2003 once the report is finalised.
Australian Government response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
Treasury will provide a report to Government in due course. The Government will consider its
response upon receiving Treasury’s report.
Response to the recommendations | 3
