Australian Government response to the
Senate Finance and Public Administration Legislation
Committee report:
Remuneration Tribunal Amendment (There For Public
Service, Not Profit) Bill 2025
AUGUST 2026
Introduction
On 5 February 2025, the Remuneration Tribunal Amendment (There For Public Service,
Not Profit) Bill 2025 (the Bill) was introduced into the Senate by Senator Jacqui Lambie,
Senator for Tasmania.
On 12 February 2025, the Senate referred the Bill to the Senate Finance and Public
Administration Legislation Committee (Committee) for inquiry and report. The inquiry
lapsed at the end of the 47th Parliament. Following the 2025 federal election, the Bill
was reintroduced into the Senate and referred again to the Committee for inquiry and
report.
The Committee received seven submissions.
On 18 March 2026, the Committee tabled its report titled Remuneration Tribunal
Amendment (There For Public Service, Not Profit) Bill 2025.
This Committee recommended that the Senate not pass the Bill. The Committee’s
report includes dissenting recommendations from Senator Lambie. This document
provides responses to Senator Lambie’s recommendations.
In addition, the Government notes that, on 15 April 2026, the independent
Remuneration Tribunal issued a public statement that it will undertake reviews of
remuneration arrangements for secretaries and full-time office holders.
As part of its public statement, the Tribunal said that it recognises the strong public
interest in the remuneration of senior public officials and is committed to ensuring
arrangements remain fair, transparent and aligned with contemporary expectations.
The Tribunal intends to complete the reviews by mid-2027.
2
Dissenting Report Recommendations – Senator Lambie
Recommendation 1:
A performance audit of the Remuneration Tribunal be conducted by the ANAO.
Response: Noted
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Auditor-General is an independent officer of the Parliament. Under section 8 of the
Auditor-General Act 1997 (the Act), the Auditor-General has complete discretion in the
performance or exercise of their functions or powers, including audits they chose to
conduct.
The Act also provides that, in performing or exercising their functions or powers, the
Auditor-General must have regard to the audit priorities of the Parliament as
determined by the Joint Committee of Public Accounts and Audit (JCPAA).
In addition, the Auditor-General receives requests for audit from individual members
and senators of the Parliament. The Auditor-General responds to requests and
publishes the request and response on the Australian National Audit Office’s website.
The JCPAA is also notified of each request.
Recommendation 2:
A detailed review of the processes and operation of the Remuneration Tribunal should
be undertaken to ensure its activities are appropriate and consistent with community
expectations.
Response: Noted
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Remuneration Tribunal is an independent statutory authority established under
the Remuneration Tribunal Act 1973. The Tribunal consists of three part-time members,
and is responsible for determining, reporting on or providing advice about remuneration
for a range of key Commonwealth offices within its jurisdiction.
The statutory independence of the Tribunal ensures that matters relating to the
remuneration of public offices are determined at arm's length from government,
parliament and the judiciary.
The Tribunal plays a critical role in providing transparency and confidence to the public
relating to remuneration arrangements of key Commonwealth offices, while ensuring
the public sector can attract and retain the right people for these important roles.
The Australian Government respects the independence of the Tribunal, including in
relation to its operations.
3
