Australian Government response to the
Environment and Communications Legislation
Committee report:
Future Made in Australia (Guarantee of Origin) Bill 2024
[Provisions] and related bills
August 2026
Introduction
The Australian Government thanks the Environment and Communications Legislation
Committee (the Committee) and those individuals and organisations who contributed to the
inquiry on the Future Made in Australia (Guarantee of Origin) Bill 2024 [Provisions] and
related bills (together referred to as the Guarantee of Origin Bills).
The Guarantee of Origin Bills were introduced into Parliament on 12 September 2024. The
package included:
- the Future Made in Australia (Guarantee of Origin) Bill 2024 (GO Bill) which
proposed to establish the voluntary Guarantee of Origin (GO) scheme to certify
renewable electricity and low emissions products such as hydrogen;
- the Future Made in Australia (Guarantee of Origin) Charges Bill 2024 which proposed
to impose charges to recover the costs of providing services to GO scheme
participants; and
- the Future Made in Australia (Guarantee of Origin Consequential Amendments and
Transitional Provisions) Bill 2024 which proposed amendments to the Clean Energy
Regulator Act 2011, the National Greenhouse and Energy Reporting Act 2007 and
the Renewable Energy (Electricity) Act 2000 required as a consequence of the
establishment of the GO scheme.
On 12 September 2024, the Senate referred the provision of the Guarantee of Origin Bills to
the Senate Environment and Communications Legislation Committee (the Committee).
On 31 October 2024, the Committee released its final report. The report included 7
recommendations, 6 of which are contained within dissenting reports from the Australian
Greens and Senator David Pocock.
In response to the recommendations made by the Australian Greens Party and Senator
Pocock, the Australian Government introduced amendments to the Guarantee of Origin Bills
in the House of Representatives on 27 November 2024 (sheet TD112 refers). The
amendments are explained in the revised Explanatory Memorandum tabled in the Senate on
28 November 2024.
The Guarantee of Origin Bills were passed by the Parliament on 27 November 2024 and
received the Royal Assent on 10 December 2024. The Guarantee of Origin Acts
commenced by Proclamation on 3 November 2025.
2
Response
Australian Greens’ Recommendations
Recommendation 1
The bill or associated legislative rules must prevent products from being advertised as
‘green’ or ‘renewable’ if fossil fuel inputs are still used in the scope 1 production process,
even where Renewable Electricity Guarantee of Origin (REGO) certification is used to
reduce scope 2 emissions of a product.
Response
The Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
The GO Bill provides a robust framework that enables Australian producers of low-emissions
products to make objective and credible claims about their product’s embodied
emissions. Without this information, it is difficult to ascertain the difference between carbon
intensive and low-emissions goods. This restricts the choice of consumers, the development
of markets and the ability for government to target support towards renewable or low-
emissions technologies. The scheme will not brand products as “green” or “renewable”. It will
verify and provide transparency over the emissions and energy sources associated with
products, including where fossil fuels have been used.
The public register will include information about who has registered to participate in the
scheme, facilities where products and renewable electricity are made, and certificates
related to the units of goods produced as well as certificates for renewable electricity.
REGO will provide a certificate with greater transparency in regard to the renewable
electricity it represents and the facility that produces it. The GO Bill does this by requiring
detailed information to be included on REGO certificates and also makes provision for
further information to be included on a voluntary or mandatory basis if provided for in rules.
The Clean Energy Regulator is responsible for maintaining the public register and
undertaking compliance and enforcement activities to ensure integrity of the scheme. This
includes the ability to order audits be undertaken by scheme participants.
Recommendation 2
To ensure the proposed wide ministerial powers are not manipulated, the bill should be
amended to require that production methods created under legislative instruments are
based on the latest available scientific evidence, and that production methods must be set
using gross-emissions so that offsets cannot be used to reduce the emissions value of the
production process.
Response
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
It is the Australian Government’s policy for the Product Guarantee of Origin (PGO) scheme
to require all material emissions sources to be accounted for. It is also our policy to not
recognise offsets such as Australian Carbon Credit Units or international units such as
Verified Carbon Units. To embed these policy positions, Government amendments were
3
moved in the House of Representatives requiring the Minister to have regard to the extent to
which the methodology determination was developed in according with certain objectives,
including that the determination:
• is accurate, by incorporating all material emissions sources that are within the parts
of the supply chain without carbon offsetting using carbon credits; and
• is based on the latest available scientific evidence as aligned with international
frameworks.
Recommendation 3
In order to secure investor certainty for new renewable projects, the Australian
Government’s policy on below baseline generators creating Renewable Electricity
Guarantee of Origin certificates for emissions intensive trade exposed facilities should be
placed in primary legislation.
Response
The Government does not agree with this recommendation.
The Australian Government agrees that it is important that REGO provide investment
certainty for new renewables projects, which is why a balanced approach has been taken to
transitioning below-baseline generation into REGO through temporary restrictions. The
Government has designed the restrictions on the retirement of below-baseline certificates to
strike the right balance between protecting the price signal for investment in new renewable
electricity projects, while recognising the low-cost electricity and certification needs of
emissions intensive trade exposed (EITE) industries and for the PGO scheme. These
restrictions are specified in section 57 of the Future Made in Australia (Guarantee of Origin)
Rules 2025.
Senator David Pocock’s Recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Future Made in Australia (Guarantee of Origin) Bill 2024 should be amended to
prevent greenwashing of products where fossil fuels are used at any point in the
production process. This should include greenwashing through the use of carbon capture
and storage, carbon credits, or the use of renewable energy to reduce scope 2 emissions.
Response
The Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
Consistent with the response to the Australian Greens Recommendation 1, the GO scheme
will provide a robust framework that enables Australian producers and users of low-
emissions products to make objective and credible claims about the embedded emissions of
their products. The scheme will not brand products as “green” or “renewable”. It will verify
and provide transparency over the emissions and energy sources associated with products,
including approaches where fossil fuels or carbon capture and storage has been used.
In order to have maximum confidence and accountability for any such approach, the GO Bill
provides that reported information would be subject to an audit and an assessment by the
Clean Energy Regulator before any PGO certificates can be produced. After a year of
4
participation, any certificates registered will be subject to an Annual Reconciliation Check,
and further audit to confirm their accuracy and completeness – which would include
verification of any abatement associated with the carbon capture and storage.
Recommendation 2
The Future Made in Australia (Guarantee of Origin) Bill 2024 should be amended to
ensure that ministerial powers are constrained such that production methods must be
based on the best available scientific evidence.
Response
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
Government amendments were moved in the House of Representatives requiring the
Minister, when making a methodology determination, to have regard to the extent to which
the determination is based on the latest available scientific evidence as aligned with
international frameworks.
Recommendation 3 (Senator Pocock)
The Future Made in Australia (Guarantee of Origin) Bill 2024 should be amended to
ensure that native forest material is explicitly excluded as a renewable electricity source
under the Renewable Electricity Guarantee of Origin certificate stream.
Response
The Government agrees with this recommendation.
Provisions in the GO Bill prevent any native forest biomass, including native forest wood
waste, from being an eligible renewable energy source. The Bill states that biomass from a
native forest is not an eligible renewable energy source in subclause 69(2) of the Bill. This
subclause acts as a statutory exception to the list of eligible renewable energy sources,
which means that any energy source listed in subclause 69(1) – including wood waste –
would not be eligible if it contains biomass from a native forest. The Bill also includes a
provision explicitly excluding biomass from a native forest from being an eligible renewable
energy source when it is part of an energy crop.
The Government has included these provisions in the primary legislation. This represents a
change from the Renewable Energy Target where similar provisions are in subordinate
legislation.
5
