Australian Government response to the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and
Security report:
Advisory report on the Strengthening Oversight of the
National Intelligence Community Bill 2025
2026
Introduction
The Australian Government thanks the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and
Security (the Committee) for its review of the Strengthening Oversight of the National
Intelligence Community Bill 2025 (the Bill).
The Government notes that the Strengthening Oversight of the National Intelligence
Community Act 2025 (the Act) passed the Parliament on 27 November 2025. The
Committee’s Report included seven recommendations for amendments to the Bill, of which
the Act addresses five: three recommendations in full (recommendations 3, 4 and 5), one in-
principle (recommendation 1) and one in part (recommendation 9).
The Government provides the following responses to the Committee’s recommendations.
2
Recommendations
Recommendation 1: The Committee recommends that the proposed regulation defining
the intelligence functions of the Department of Home Affairs under section 3A of the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act 1986, to be inserted by item 6 of the
Strengthening Oversight of the National Intelligence Community Bill 2025:
• clearly define the functions of the Department of Home Affairs that are subject to
oversight by the IGIS and the Committee; and
• be promptly amended if there are any subsequent relevant administrative changes
in the Department of Home Affairs.
The Committee further recommends that the Bill be amended to require that:
• once the regulation is made, briefing be provided to the Committee and the IGIS by
the Department of Home Affairs on its interpretation of that regulation; and
• following any future changes to the regulation, the Committee and the IGIS be
provided a further briefing from the Department of Home Affairs on its
interpretation of the new regulation.
Response: The Government agrees in-principle to this recommendation.
Regulations will clearly define the intelligence functions of the Department of Home Affairs
(Home Affairs) and be promptly amended to reflect any relevant changes to these functions.
The Act was amended to provide, in relation to regulations defining the intelligence
functions of the Home Affairs, that:
• before the Governor-General makes regulations for the purpose of defining the
intelligence functions of Home Affairs, the Minister administering the Inspector-
General of Intelligence and Security Act (IGIS Act) must consult the IGIS and be
satisfied that the IGIS has had the opportunity to be briefed by Home Affairs in
relation to the proposed regulations, and
• if the Governor-General makes regulations for the purposes of defining the
intelligence functions of Home Affairs, or prescribing consultation or notification
requirements in relation to changes to the intelligence functions of Home Affairs, the
Minister administering the IGIS Act must inform the Committee of the regulations,
and the Committee may request a briefing from Home Affairs or the IGIS on the
regulations.
These requirements ensure that appropriate consultation is undertaken with the IGIS, and
the IGIS has the opportunity to be briefed, before regulations are made providing for, or
varying, the meaning of Home Affairs’ intelligence function. They also ensure that the
3
Committee has the opportunity to obtain briefings on any regulations made for those
purposes.
Recommendation 2: Noting the intent of the Strengthening Oversight of the National
Intelligence Community Bill 2025 to provide the Inspector-General of Intelligence and
Security and the Commonwealth Ombudsman discrete oversight responsibilities, the
Committee recommends the Government consider whether additional measures may be
necessary to enable those bodies to share information relating to their respective
oversight of the Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission and the Australian Federal
Police, beyond the conclusion of the transitional provisions.
Response: The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government acknowledges there may be an ongoing need for information-sharing
between the Ombudsman and the IGIS relating to their respective oversight beyond the
conclusion of the transitional provisions. After the conclusion of the transitional provisions
the IGIS and the Ombudsman would still be able to share information relating to the ACIC
and the AFP, AUSTRAC and Home Affairs in certain circumstances.
After the information-sharing transitional arrangements set out in Schedule 5 to the Act
cease, section 32AF of the IGIS Act would continue to enable the IGIS to share information
obtained by an IGIS official, in the course of exercising their powers or performing functions
or duties, with the Ombudsman if the IGIS considers that information is relevant to the
Ombudsman’s functions and is satisfied on reasonable grounds that there are satisfactory
arrangements in place for protecting the information. Further, section 35AB of the
Ombudsman Act 1976 (Ombudsman Act) would continue to enable the Ombudsman to
share information in relation to a Commonwealth agency, within the meaning of the IGIS
Act, with the IGIS (which includes the ACIC, AFP, AUSTRAC or Home Affairs) if the
information was obtained in the course of the Ombudsman performing a function under the
Ombudsman Act or any other Act, and the Ombudsman considers the information is
relevant to the performance of the IGIS’s functions.
The principles and processes supporting appropriate information-sharing between the IGIS
and the Ombudsman are set out in a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU). The MOU is
being updated following passage of the Act.
The operation of the transitional provisions will be assessed, in consultation with relevant
agencies, to determine whether any additional measures in addition to existing information-
sharing provisions in the Act are required on an ongoing basis. The Government notes that
recommendation 62 of the 2024 Independent Intelligence Review (IIR) recommended that
the next IIR consider the effectiveness of expanding the oversight jurisdiction of the IGIS and
4
PJCIS. This would also provide an opportunity to assess the effectiveness of
information-sharing arrangements between the IGIS and the Ombudsman.
Recommendation 3: The Committee recommends that the Strengthening Oversight of the
National Intelligence Community Bill 2025 be amended to:
• remove the words ‘to monitor and’ from proposed paragraph 29(1)(bad) of the
Intelligence Services Act 2001 (IS Act);
• remove proposed paragraph 29(1)(bae) of the IS Act; and
• include referrals made under paragraph (1)(bad) within the function at subsection
29(2).
Response: The Government agrees to this recommendation. The Act, as passed by the
Parliament, implements this recommendation in full.
Recommendation 4: The Committee recommends that the Strengthening Oversight of the
National Intelligence Community Bill 2025 be amended to remove the words ‘and inquire
into’ from proposed paragraphs 29(1)(ba) and 29(1)(baaa) of the Intelligence Services Act
2001.
Response: The Government agrees to this recommendation. The Act, as passed by the
Parliament, implements this recommendation in full.
Recommendation 5: The Committee recommends that the Strengthening Oversight of the
National Intelligence Community Bill 2025 be amended to provide that where the
Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security elects not to undertake an inquiry into an
operational matter referred by the Committee, the Inspector-General must advise the
Committee of this decision.
Response: The Government agrees to this recommendation. The Act, as passed by the
Parliament, implements this recommendation in full.
5
Recommendation 6: The Committee recommends that Part 2 of Schedule 1 to the
Intelligence Services Act 2001 and any other provisions of the Act, as required, be
amended to the extent necessary to:
• allow the Chair and Deputy Chair to each nominate a single member of their
personal staff who are to be provided with an appropriate level of security
clearance that would allow them to assist their respective principals in the
performance of their duties on the Committee;
• permit such staff to lawfully access information provided to the Committee,
consistent with their security clearance; and
• ensure such staff are treated as members of staff of the Committee for the
purpose of the secrecy offence in clause 12.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government notes that the 2023-24 Budget allocated additional ongoing funding to the
Committee, including additional staff, to ensure the Committee can effectively exercise its
expanded oversight role. The Government committed $1.3 million over four years from
2023-24 and $0.3 million ongoing which would facilitate additional secretariat support for
the work of the Committee.
Recommendation 7: The Committee recommends that the Strengthening Oversight of the
National Intelligence Community Bill 2025 be amended to require that, when it is the view
of a responsible Minister that a report of the Committee contains information that falls
under subclause 7(1) of Schedule 1 to the Intelligence Services Act 2001, the Minister’s
confidential response to the Committee include the element of subclause 7(1) on which
that finding is based.
Response: The Government does not agree to this recommendation.
Clause 7 of Schedule 1 of the Intelligence Services Act 2001 (Intelligence Services Act)
operates to prevent the disclosure of sensitive information. It would not be appropriate to
require the Minister to disclose which element of subclause 7(1) is being relied upon as this
could of itself potentially disclose sensitive information.
Recommendation 8: The Committee recommends that the Intelligence Services Act 2001
be amended to provide that a quorum of the full Committee is 7 members, unless the
Chair and the Deputy Chair are both present in which case the quorum will be 5 members.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
The National Security Legislation Amendment (Comprehensive Review and Other Measures
No. 2) Act 2023 amended the Intelligence Services Act in 2023 to increase the membership
6
of the Committee from 11 to 13 members, with a quorum of 7 representing the majority of
these members. The Government will continue to review the need for amendments to the
Intelligence Services Act to support the effective operation of the Committee.
Recommendation 9: The Committee recommends that the Strengthening Oversight of the
National Intelligence Community Bill 2025 be amended to include the following
amendments to Schedule 1 to the Intelligence Services Act 2001:
• subclause 2(7) be repealed
• subclause 20(2) be repealed
• subclause 20(3) be amended to replace the word ‘review’ with ‘meeting’
• subclause 22(2) be amended to provide that the Committee must make
arrangements acceptable to the originating agency for the return or destruction of
documents having a national security classification when no longer required by the
Committee.
Response: The Government agrees in part to this recommendation.
The Act, as passed by the Parliament:
• repealed subclause 2(7) of the Intelligence Services Act
• amended subclause 20(3) to replace the word ‘review’ with ‘meeting’ to reflect that
the Committee may give directions in relation to any meeting (including a hearing)
that is conducted in private, and
• amended subclause 22(2) to provide that the Committee must make arrangements
acceptable to the originating agency for the return or destruction of documents
having a national security classification when no longer required by the Committee.
The Act did not repeal subclause 20(2) of the Intelligence Services Act, which provides that
the Committee must not conduct a review in public without the approval of the Ministers
responsible for the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, Australian Secret
Intelligence Service, Australian Geospatial-Intelligence Organisation, Defence Intelligence
Organisation, Australian Signals Directorate and Office of National Intelligence. Given the
sensitive nature of reviews conducted and information handled by the Committee, the
Government considers it would not be appropriate to remove this requirement.
7
Recommendation 10: The Committee recommends that the Strengthening Oversight of
the National Intelligence Community Bill 2025 be amended to enable the Committee to
conduct a review of Part 4 and Schedule 1 of the Intelligence Services Act 2001, and any
other law of the Commonwealth to the extent that it relates to those provisions, at any
time.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government notes the Committee is not currently precluded from giving advice to the
relevant Minister on the operation of the Intelligence Services Act or any other related law
of the Commonwealth and may request amendments at any time.
Recommendation 11: The Committee recommends that, as part of future reforms to the
role and functions of the Inspector-General of the Australian Defence Force (IGADF), the
Government consider empowering the IGADF to consider and independently inquire into
the subject of written notices made under proposed subsection 476.7(6) of the Criminal
Code.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
Where a Defence official engages in computer-related conduct that causes material
damage, interference or obstruction to a computer in Australia, the Act requires the official
to give written notice to the Chief of the Defence Force and, if the person is not under the
command of the Chief of the Defence Force, the Secretary of the Department of Defence.
The requirement to give notice is intended to provide senior officials with visibility of
conduct that may require further internal review, given the impact such damage,
interference or obstruction could have. Such a review could consider the legal basis for the
original conduct or operational review to ensure computer capabilities were used
appropriately and in line with Defence standard operating procedures.
The Government will continue to consider the most appropriate method of oversight for
notices made under subsection 476.7(6) of the Criminal Code, including in the context of
any future legislative reform around the remit of the IGADF.
Recommendation 12: The Committee recommends that the Strengthening Oversight of
the National Intelligence Community Bill 2025 be passed by Parliament.
Response: The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government notes the Act was passed by the Parliament on 27 November 2025.
8
