Australian Government response to the
Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade References
Committee report:
Adaptive sport programs for Australian Defence Force
veterans
July 2026
Introduction
The Australian Government (the Government) thanks the Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade
References Committee (the Committee) for its report on Adaptive sport programs for Australian
Defence Force veterans (the Adaptive Sports Report). The Government extends its thanks to the
individuals and organisations who took the time to engage with the inquiry and provide submissions.
Comprehensive reform is ongoing
Since the tabling of the Adaptive Sports Report in May 2023, the Government has commenced a
substantial and long-term program of reform in response to the Final Report of the Royal Commission
into Defence and Veteran Suicide. This represents the most comprehensive reform ever undertaken
across the systems, culture, and processes across the Department of Defence and the Department of
Veterans’ Affairs (DVA).
To date, 32 of the Royal Commission recommendations have been implemented, with work underway
on the remainder. Critically, the Australian Government has committed $78 million over 4 years from
2025-26 and $7.5 million per annum ongoing to establish a new agency dedicated to veteran and
family wellbeing. This agency commenced operations on 1 July 2026.
In a nation where everyone has a place in sport, the Government encourages veterans to be actively
involved in sport programs, activities, and events, either as participants, coaches, officials, or
volunteers.
Response to recommendations
Recommendation 1 The committee recommends that the term ‘veterans’ sport’ should be adopted
to describe the spectrum of activities from adaptive sports—where modifications of equipment or
rules are required to allow veterans with physical injuries to participate—to activities designed to
facilitate the inclusion of veterans in community-based sporting clubs as part of transition or
rehabilitation from mental health impacts of service.
Agreed-in-principle.
The Government supports the use of inclusive and context-specific language to describe sport as a
wellbeing tool for current ADF members and veterans. The use of the term ‘veterans’ sport’ to
broadly refer to veterans’ participation in sport as a tool for health, wellbeing, rehabilitation, and
transition from the ADF is consistent with this approach, as is the continued use within Defence of the
term ‘ADF Adaptive Sport’ to describe funded sporting programs tailored for wounded, injured or ill
ADF members to participate.
Recommendation 2 The committee recommends that the focus of veterans’ sports should be on
rehabilitation and supporting transition from service for any veteran who wishes to participate, with
facilitation of teams for competitive events being an adjunct for the small number of veterans who
wish to try out for selection. Government, sporting organisations and codes, and the veteran
community should take an active role in supporting this focus.
Agreed.
The Government acknowledges the positive impact that participation in sport can have on a person’s
health, wellbeing, and transition from a predominantly ADF Service-centred life to a predominantly
civilian-centred life (‘transition’). The Government also recognises the people, organisations, and
programs in the Australian sporting ecosystem that contribute to those impacts. While participation in
elite-level and competitive international events provides value for some veterans, these events are not
suitable for the needs of all veterans. The Government therefore agrees that the focus of veterans’
sport should be on rehabilitation, supporting transition from service and improving access for all
veterans who wish to participate.
Defence currently supports access to sport and recreational activities for ADF members who are
medically unfit for duty and participating in an occupational rehabilitation program. Where eligible,
support is provided through a Meaningful Engagement Program, which aims to prevent the
development of secondary mental health problems associated with a lack of purposeful activity.
Meaningful Engagement Activities support the implementation of the member’s overall rehabilitation
program. Funding is provided for both serving and transitioning members. Defence also considers
transition preparedness and personal wellbeing domains when developing individual transition plans
for ADF members who are transitioning. Defence Transition Support Officers are able to assist
transitioning members identify potential community-based activities, including sports, to help
establish post-service social connections. Eligibility for Career Transition Training funding has been
expanded to engagement activities, including sporting programs for those leaving full time service.
Eligible clients also have access to psychosocial rehabilitation activities as part of the DVA
Rehabilitation Program. Depending on a client’s assessed need and rehabilitation goals, those
activities could include participation in sport and/or the provision of necessary sporting aids. More
information on the DVA Rehabilitation Program is available on the DVA website.
Recommendation 3 The committee recommends that the criteria underpinning selection of staff
for management or coaching roles in events such as the Invictus Games should require—in addition
to sporting or management qualifications directly relevant to the role—a commitment and
demonstrated capability to ensure veteran rehabilitation as a priority.
Noted.
The Government supports placing veteran wellbeing at the centre of any rehabilitative activities,
including sport. This is why when selecting individuals for management or coaching roles, Defence
considers their qualifications and sporting experience, and requires that the individuals demonstrate a
commitment and capability to prioritising the recovery, rehabilitation, and reintegration of wounded,
injured, and ill participants.
Recommendation 4 The committee recommends that the Department of Defence and the
Department of Veterans’ Affairs align policies to jointly support the Joint Transition Authority to
facilitate veterans’ sports programs that support transition from service into civilian life.
Noted.
The Government notes that a range of programs and initiatives that can facilitate access to sport to
support the rehabilitation and transition of ADF members and veterans are already delivered through
Defence and DVA. Effective coordination is a priority when a person is separating from the ADF on
medical grounds and transitioning from the Defence Rehabilitation Program to the DVA
Rehabilitation Program. If a person’s rehabilitation activities include sporting activities, these are
considered during the warm handover process as the person transitions between these programs. This
will be further supported from 1 July 2026 by the new Veteran and Family Wellbeing Agency, which
has been established to better assist with navigation to existing programs and supports for veterans.
Recommendation 5 The committee recommends that the Department of Defence and the
Department of Veterans’ Affairs assess the benefit of directing some existing funding for
rehabilitation programs for veterans (including those still serving) to structured programs such as
the Invictus Pathways Program where sport is used as a vehicle to provide physical and mental
support to veterans, and making such programs more accessible to veterans across Australia.
Noted.
The DVA Rehabilitation Program provides rehabilitation support to veterans who satisfy the legal
requirements of the Military, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 2004 (MRCA), or historically
those also outlined in the Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation (Defence-related Claims) Act 1988
(DRCA). The aim of this support is to maximise the potential to restore a person who has an
impairment, or an incapacity for service or work, as a result of a service-related injury or disease, to at
least the same physical and psychological state, and the same social, vocational, and educational
status, as they had before their injury or disease.
Rehabilitation activities (such as participation in sport) are supported through the DVA Rehabilitation
Program so that any activity can be delivered as part of the fulsome consideration of a veteran’s
needs. Defence and DVA continuously review and assess policies and programs that provide physical
and mental health supports to veteran and serving members.
Recommendation 6 The committee recommends that Department of Veterans’ Affairs grant
guidelines should be amended to accommodate programs that are specifically targeted at veteran
participation in community-based veterans’ sport.
Noted.
The Veteran Wellbeing Grants Program, administered by DVA, funds social inclusion and
connectedness activities that promote good mental health and wellbeing among the veteran
community, which may include sporting or recreational projects for veterans and their families.
Organisations can apply for small grants of up to $50,000 and large grants of between $50,001 and
$200,000, subject to their eligibility requirement, either as an ex-service organisation (ESO) or as a
non-ESO in a consortium with at least one ESO.
From 2022 the Government, through the Veteran Wellbeing Grants Program, has provided grants of
over $10.3 million to 172 organisations to undertake a variety of veteran wellbeing activities,
including sport programs. More information on the Veteran Wellbeing Grants Program is available on
the DVA website.
DVA will continue to encourage a diverse range of grant applicants and projects to be supported,
including those that support participation in sport as a tool for health, wellbeing, psychosocial
rehabilitation, and transition from the ADF.
Recommendation 7 The committee recommends that the Department of Veterans’ Affairs include
in its resourcing advice, as per Recommendation 4 in the Royal Commission into Defence and
Veteran Suicide’s Interim Report, to the Australian Government the necessary funding to
adequately support community-based veterans sport programs.
Noted.
The Government invested $11.1 million over 4 years to expand and enhance the existing DVA
Demand Driven Funding Model (DDFM) and to support its operations, in response to
Recommendation 4 of the Interim Report of the Royal Commission into Defence and Veteran Suicide.
Consistent with Recommendation 4, DVA provides advice to Government on its resourcing needs as
part of the Budget and Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook processes. Where relevant, this advice
includes the resourcing required for the programs and initiatives delivered by DVA that facilitate
access to sport to support the rehabilitation and transition of ADF members and veterans.
Recommendation 8 The committee recommends that future Commonwealth funding for veterans’
sport to organisations that are not community-based sporting clubs should include conditions
regarding a minimum amount that must be “flowed through” to help sustain the delivery of
programs at the community level.
Noted.
The Government notes the importance of the wider community in supporting and sustaining a vibrant
sporting culture in Australia. However, ongoing investments in veteran rehabilitation, including
sporting activities, will continue to be guided by a focus on ensuring positive wellbeing outcomes and
program effectiveness.
Recommendation 9 The committee recommends the Department of Defence consider making
Reserve days available to the Senior Australian Defence Force Officer in each state or region to
engage local veterans—already active in veterans’ sports—to facilitate increased community-based
sporting clubs engagement with local ADF units and ex-service organisations as well as support
with administration such as grant applications.
Noted.
The Government notes that Defence maintains and resources Base Community Engagement Plans and
supports the incorporation of engagement with community-based sporting clubs into these plans.
Reserve days are made available, where required, to engage local reservists to facilitate this
engagement.
Recommendation 10 The committee recommends that the Department of Defence and the
Department of Veterans’ Affairs assess the feasibility of providing a voucher system to encourage
and support veterans access to veterans’ sports as part of their transition, and where appropriate,
gain relevant vocational qualifications.
Noted.
The Defence Force Transition Program provides up to $5,320 for Career Transition Training (CTT)
for transitioning members who wish to take up employment within sport, in some form, or gain
meaningful engagement through sport related programs. The CTT funding aligns with the concept of
a voucher system. This may include match officials, coaching, or other sport specific support services.
Members seeking to leave full-time service are encouraged to apply for CTT, and to have their
existing sporting credentials formally recognised or to gain relevant vocational qualifications through
CTT, to enable them to engage more effectively in local community sporting programs.
Recommendation 11 The committee recommends that the Department of Defence and the
Department of Veterans’ Affairs work with veteran’s sports stakeholders to design the package of
reform that will deliver recommendations 1-10 of this report.
Noted.
While a reform package is not agreed, noting that the majority of recommendations have been noted,
Defence and DVA will continue to support veterans’ sport through the programs and initiatives
detailed in this response, which are delivering important outcomes for veterans, and will continue to
work closely together to support serving and former members of the ADF more broadly.
Recommendation 12 The committee recommends that the Australian Government consider a
recommendation to the Governor-General to declare the 2014, 2016, and 2017 Invictus Games as
nominated multi-sport events under the Regulations.
Noted
The Government recognises the importance, to both potential individual recipients and the broader
Australian community, of honouring participants who represent their country at the Invictus Games.
The 2020 amendments to the Letters Patent and Regulations for the Australian Sports Medal (ASM)
enabled appropriate medallic recognition to Australians who, at the highest level, represent their
country at international multi-sport events, including the Olympics (Summer and Winter),
Paralympics, Special Olympics, Commonwealth Games, Invictus Games and the International Sports
Federation for Persons with Intellectual Disability (INAS) Global Games.
Australia’s hosting of the 2018 Invictus Games was a key catalyst to the changes made to the ASM
and the importance of this 2018 event and the Invictus Games more broadly.
Until these amendments there was no specific award in the Australian Honours and Awards system
for participants at eligible international sporting events to receive medallic recognition.
The Government acknowledges that changes made to the ASM do not provide retrospective
recognition for Invictus Games participants prior to the 2018 Invictus Games, or indeed, participants
of any of the other International Sporting events now specified in the Letters Patent and Regulations.
Extending retrospectivity to one particular medal, or one particular cohort within a medal, has broader
implications for the entire Australian Honours and Awards system. The system is founded on
considerations of consistency, equity, and fairness. Upholding the integrity of the system as a whole is
fundamental to the value Australians place on it.
