Australian Government response to the
Senate Committee Economics report:
Corporations Amendment (Digital Assets Framework)
Bill 2025
September 2026

Introduction
The Australian Government thanks the Senate Economics Legislation Committee for its consideration
of the Corporations Amendment (Digital Assets Framework) Bill 2025.
The Bill passed both Houses on 1 April 2026 and received Royal Assent on 8 April 2026 as the
Corporations Amendment (Digital Assets Framework) Act 2026.
The Government provides the following response to the Committee’s recommendations.
Introduction | 1
Response to the recommendations
Coalition Senators’ Additional Comments
Recommendation 1
The Coalition Senators’ additional comments recommend that the bill be amended to include a
statutory review of the digital asset regulatory framework within two years after commencement
of the bill.
Australian Government response
The Government does not support this recommendation.
The Act and associated regulations allow for the flexibility to review and make changes as
required during the rollout of the framework and throughout its lifecycle, rather than only at a
fixed 2 year milestone.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that the Treasurer urgently provide updated Statements of
Expectations to ASIC and other regulators within his remit.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation. On 16 July 2026, the Government released new
Statements of Expectations for ASIC and APRA.
The new Statements of Expectations can be found here: https://treasury.gov.au/the-
department/accountability-reporting/statements-of-expectations
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the Government carefully consider the work of the Council of
Financial Regulators on debanking and assess whether further measures are required to ensure
that properly regulated digital asset businesses can access essential banking services.
Australian Government response
The Government supports this recommendation in principle.
The Council of Financial Regulators’ report made recommendations aimed at providing a better
understanding of the extent and nature of de-banking and to improve transparency, consistency,
and fairness for affected customers. The Government released its response in June 2023.
More detail about the Government response can be found at
https://treasury.gov.au/sites/default/files/2023-06/p2023-404377-gr.pdf
2 | Response to the recommendations
