Australian Government response to the
Joint Select Committee on the Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Voice Referendum report:
Advisory Report on the Constitution Alteration
(Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice) 2023
MAY 2023
Acknowledgements
The Australian Government acknowledges the traditional owners and custodians of country
throughout Australia and acknowledges their continuing connection to land, waters and community.
We pay our respects to the people, the cultures and their elders past and present.
The Australian Government thanks the individuals and organisations who contributed to this inquiry,
including all those who made submissions and appeared as witnesses, and the members of the Joint
Select Committee on the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice Referendum (Committee) and
the Committee’s secretariat. We particularly acknowledge the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people who shared their experiences, views and aspirations with this inquiry.
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the Committee’s report on the Constitution Alteration
(Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice) 2023 (Bill).
The Bill recognises Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Peoples of Australia in
the Australian Constitution through an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice (Voice). Enshrining
the Voice in the Constitution is the form of recognition sought in the 2017 Uluru Statement from the
Heart. The Voice would be an enduring institution to ensure that Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples can make representations to the Commonwealth Parliament and the Executive
Government of the Commonwealth on matters that relate to them, improving the development and
implementation of laws and policies.
The referendum that would follow the passage of this Bill through the Parliament is part of the
Government’s commitment to implement the Uluru Statement from the Heart in full.
The Australian Government’s response to the report is set out below. The response addresses the
recommendations contained in the report, the dissenting reports and additional comments from
members of the Committee.
2
Recommendations
Recommendation 1: The Committee recommends that the Constitution Alteration (Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Voice) 2023 be passed unamended.
The Government supports this recommendation.
The Bill is the product of more than a decade of efforts to recognise Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples in the Constitution. It offers both practical and substantive recognition. As the
Committee’s report makes clear, the Bill is fit for purpose, meets the first request expressed in the
Uluru Statement from the Heart and is constitutionally sound.
Moreover, as outlined in the Statement of Compatibility with Human Rights accompanying the
Explanatory Memorandum, the Bill:
would promote the rights and freedoms of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples by
acknowledging their continuing disadvantage, and historical exclusion from participation in
the making of decisions, policies and laws that affect them. The Bill does this in a way that
would not abrogate or otherwise negatively affect the ability of members of the broader
community to enjoy or exercise their political, economic, social, cultural or other rights and
freedoms.
The Voice, as a representative institution, would enable Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples to express their views to the Parliament and the Executive Government of the
Commonwealth on issues that relate to them, including their communities. This will ensure
that the laws, policies and programs of the Commonwealth are better attuned to
empowering Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, addressing disadvantage, and
improving outcomes.
3
Liberal Members’ Dissenting Report
Recommendation 1: The proposal for an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice should not be
adopted in its current form.
The Government does not support this recommendation. As noted above, the Government supports
the Committee’s recommendation that the Bill be passed unamended.
Recommendation 2: Noting the Coalition will not stand in the way of Australians having their say
on the proposal, the Government should amend the drafting of the Constitution Alteration
(Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice) 2023 to address the significant risks identified through
the Committee process.
The Government does not support this recommendation.
Amendments to the Bill are not necessary. The Bill is constitutionally sound, and the Voice would
enhance our system of representative and responsible government. This is consistent with the
submissions and evidence provided by most of the eminent legal experts to the Committee.
In particular, the Solicitor-General’s opinion attached to the Attorney-General’s submission to the
Committee (Solicitor-General’s Opinion) stated that proposed section 129 is not just compatible with
the system of representative and responsible government prescribed by the Constitution, but an
enhancement of that system. The Solicitor-General’s Opinion indicated that proposed section 129
would not require the Executive Government to consult with the Voice prior to developing any
policy or making any decision. Moreover, the Parliament would be empowered to legislate to specify
the extent to which decision-makers within the Executive Government are required to consider
representations of the Voice in certain contexts.
Recommendation 3: The People should never again be asked to vote on constitutional
amendments that do not have the benefit of detailed public debate, in the form of constitutional
conventions or similar.
The Government does not agree with the assertions contained in this recommendation.
Previous referendums have been preceded by a wide range of different processes, reflecting the
context of each referendum.
In this case, there has been a comprehensive and lengthy process stretching over more than a
decade to determine the right form of constitutional recognition for Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples. That process has involved consultation with First Nations peoples, as well as
parliamentary inquiries and expert reports. This has included the 2012 Final Report of the Expert
Panel on Constitutional Recognition of Indigenous Australians, and the 2015 Final Report of the Joint
Select Committee on Constitutional Recognition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples.
In 2017, a Voice was endorsed as the preferred form of constitutional recognition in the Uluru
Statement from the Heart issued at the National Constitutional Convention, following the Uluru
Dialogues.
The Referendum Council-led Uluru Dialogues consisted of 12 First Nations Regional Dialogues and
one Regional Meeting. The Dialogues engaged 1,200 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander delegates
from traditional owner groups, community organisations, and key individuals on their views on
meaningful recognition.
4
In 2018, the Joint Select Committee on Constitutional Recognition relating to Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Peoples inquired into options for constitutional change, including the proposal to
establish a Voice. It recommended, among other things, the Government initiate a process of co-
design with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples to achieve a design for the Voice that best
suited their needs and aspirations.
On 30 July 2022, the Prime Minister, the Hon Anthony Albanese MP, released draft text of the
constitutional amendment at the Garma Festival for discussion. This draft text drew on the
considerable discussion of amendments already in the public domain and provided a further
opportunity for the public to engage with the proposed amendment in the lead up to parliamentary
consideration.
The draft text was subject to robust scrutiny and testing from the Referendum Working Group, the
Constitutional Expert Group and other legal experts. As a result of that process, the Government
made changes to the draft text, including to put beyond doubt the broad scope of the Parliament’s
power to make laws relating to the Voice. The proposal has been subject to further public debate
and consideration in the course of this Committee’s inquiry, which has affirmed the findings of those
earlier consultation processes.
National Members’ Dissenting Report
The National Members’ Dissenting Report contains no specific recommendations. However, the
Report states that The Nationals do not support the Report of the Joint Select Committee on the
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Voice Referendum or its recommendations.
The Government does not support the views expressed in this dissenting report.
Additional Comments from Senator Andrew Bragg
Recommendation 1: The ‘seven words’ model be adopted into the constitutional amendment.
The Government does not support this recommendation.
The ‘seven words’ model would involve inserting the words ‘and the legal effect of its
representations’ to the end of s 129(iii).
As set out in the Government’s response to recommendations 1 and 2 of the Liberal Members’
Dissenting Report, amendments to the Bill are not necessary.
Paragraph [35] of the Solicitor-General’s Opinion states that this proposed amendment ‘was
overtaken by the current wording of proposed s 129(iii), which necessarily includes (although it
extends beyond) the power to legislate with respect to the legal effect of the Voice’s
representations.’
Additional Comments from Australian Greens Members
The Additional Comments from Australian Greens Members contain no specific recommendations.
The Government notes these additional comments.
5
