Australian Government response to the
Senate, Community Affairs Legislation Committee’s report and
dissenting reports of Australian Greens and Labor Senators:
Inquiry and report into National Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment (Participant
Service Guarantee and Other Measures) Bill 2021
July 2023
Introduction
The Australian Government notes the Senate, Community Affairs Legislation Committee
(the Committee’s) inquiry and report into the National Disability Insurance Scheme
Amendment (Participant Service Guarantee and Other Measures) Bill 2021 (the Bill).
The report contains the single recommendation of the Committee to pass the Bill. Senators
of the Australian Greens and Labor Senators provided separate dissenting reports
recommending the Bill not be passed without the government engaging in genuine co-
design with people with disability or without significant amendment.
2
Inquiry into the National Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment (Participant
Service Guarantee and Other Measures) Bill 2021
Recommendations made by the Committee
Recommendation 1: The committee recommends that the bill be passed
Noted
The Bill was passed on 30 March 2022, with Government amendments and bipartisan
support. The Government, therefore, notes the recommendation.
Dissenting reports provided by the Australian Greens and Labor Party
Recommendation 1 (Australian Greens): The Australian Greens recommend that this bill
not be passed in its current form and that further consulting and genuine co-design occur in
relation to any future reforms to the NDIS.
Recommendation 1 (Labor Party): Labor Senators recommend that the Government engage
in genuine co-design and consultation on the Bill and Rules before either proceed.
Noted
The Government has commenced a review of the design, operations and sustainability of the
NDIS (the Review) which is due to report to the Government in October 2023. The Review
is also examining ways to build a more responsive, supportive and sustainable market and
workforce.
The Review is based on the principle of co-design with people with disabilities and will have
careful regard to the findings and proceedings of previous and ongoing reviews and inquires,
so that input already provided by the disability community is fully taken into account. The
Review will engage with Australians living with disability, carers, and the disability sector,
as well as the states and territories and other relevant experts.
The Government has also committed to work with the disability community to improve the
NDIS, including on the implementation of the initiatives in this year’s Budget and the NDIS
Financial Sustainability Framework.
3
