Australian Government response to the
Second Interim Report of the Joint Select Committee on
Implementation of the National Redress Scheme
July 2023
Introduction
The Australian Government acknowledges the Second Interim Report of the Joint Select
Committee on Implementation of the National Redress Scheme and would like to thank all who
participated in this Inquiry. Information provided by survivors and stakeholders is critical to
the ongoing improvement of the National Redress Scheme (the Scheme) for people who have
experienced institutional child sexual abuse.
Since their formation, the Joint Select Committees and current Joint Standing Committee have
provided important insights and recommendations focusing on the policy, program and legal
response to redress related recommendations of the Royal Commission into Institutional
Responses to Child Sexual Abuse (the Royal Commission), including the establishment and
operation of the Scheme and ongoing support for survivors.
The Scheme was established on 1 July 2018 in response to recommendations of the Royal
Commission. The Scheme acknowledges that many children were sexually abused in Australian
institutions, recognises the suffering they endured because of this abuse, holds institutions to
account and helps survivors access redress.
The Scheme now encompasses all Commonwealth and state and territory government
institutions, and over 480 non-government institutions. More than 27,700 applications have
been submitted to the Scheme with over 13,400 outcomes issued to applicants and
approximately $1.07 billion in redress payments made as at 30 June 2023. The current average
payment amount is over $88,600 (significantly higher than the $65,000 estimated by the Royal
Commission). As part of their offer, survivors can also access counselling and a direct personal
response (DPR) that acknowledges the abuse that occurred from the responsible institution/s.
Survivors can also access support before, during or after the application process through
Redress Support Services.
In response to the legislated Second Year Review of the National Redress Scheme (the Review),
a range of improvements to the Scheme have been implemented and other changes are
underway. The final Australian Government Response to the Review was published on
4 May 2023. As set out below, the Australian Government supports many of the
recommendations made in the Joint Select Committee’s Second Interim Report, and notes the
significant intersections with those made by the Review. A significant priority of the Scheme
has been to support all governments, as Scheme partners, to consider the Review and progress
improvements arising from the Review’s recommendations.
The Scheme is currently receiving an average of 872 applications per month, compared to an
average of 307 per month in the three years to March 2022. A record of over 1,100 applications
were received by the Scheme in March 2023. The beginning of this increase coincided with the
removal of the requirement to provide a witnessed statutory declaration when submitting an
application form and the streamlining of the online application process through myGov.
As part of the 2023-24 Budget, the Government announced funding of $142.2 million over
five years to support the Scheme to continue to deliver outcomes for survivors, including
$80.1 million to 30 June 2027 for Redress Support Services to assist survivors to apply to the
Scheme. The Budget also supported the finalisation of the Government’s response to the
Second Year Review of the Scheme.
2
The Scheme has also increased its trauma-informed engagement with applicants, and aims to
provide support that is timely, consistent, and responsive. This includes refining the approach
to contacting applicants to ensure all necessary information is collected and providing the
opportunity for applicants to opt into receiving regular progress calls; further simplifying the
outcome letter package through a co-design process with survivors and Redress Support
Services; establishing a panel of chief Independent Decision Makers to support the Independent
Decision Maker workforce in their role; making redress specific financial counselling available;
and enhancing support for survivors to access a DPR. Additionally, the Scheme is updating the
application form so that it will be easier to follow and use, and be more trauma and culturally
informed.
In 2022, the Scheme introduced a DPR Information and Support Service to help survivors, their
support persons and institutions better understand and access DPR. Where requested by the
survivor, the service can contact the institution on behalf of the applicant to commence the DPR
process. As at 30 June 2023, over 7,300 applicants indicated they may participate in a DPR.
The number of survivors requesting a DPR has increased from an average of 52 per cent in the
first two years of operation, to 63 per cent in year 5 of the Scheme.
The Scheme also facilitated the co-development with survivors, advocates and Redress Support
Services of a Scheme Service Charter, available on the Scheme’s website at
www.nationalredress.gov.au/applying/charter. The Service Charter was publicly released in
September 2022 and outlines a range of commitments to survivors that they can expect when
interacting with the Scheme. The Service Charter is complemented by a survivor experience
survey to help measure if the Scheme is being delivered effectively, and its findings are
reflected through the Scheme’s strategic success measures.
Building on the success of Survivor Roundtables held to date, the Survivor Roundtable – which
brings survivors and their support people together to share experiences and contribute their
views on the Scheme’s operation – has been formally incorporated into the Scheme’s
governance arrangements in 2023. Formalising the advisory role of survivors and their
advocates in the Inter-Governmental Agreement recognises and strengthens their voice in the
Scheme’s operation. The improvements set out above build on other measures progressed since
the Scheme began, including the introduction of advance payments of $10,000 for survivors
who are elderly or terminally ill and the option to pay redress by instalments.
The Australian Government remains committed to ensuring access to timely and
trauma-informed redress for survivors. Feedback to the Scheme is encouraged, with a view to
informing ongoing improvements and to meeting the needs of survivors. As such, the Australian
Government welcomes both the Joint Standing Committee’s and previous Joint Select
Committees’ insights to support these aims.
3
Recommendations made by the Committee
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends the establishment of a First Nations panel to provide specific
advice to the National Redress Scheme on:
 the design and implementation of cultural safety principles and practice; and
 the development and implementation of an intensive education campaign across
regional, rural, and remote communities to drive awareness and improve access to the
National Redress Scheme for First Nations people.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in principle.
The Australian Government welcomes feedback and input from First Nations Australians and
is committed to embedding cultural safety principles and practice in the Scheme.
The Survivor Roundtable includes participation from survivors and survivor groups
representing First Nations peoples, providing them with opportunities to have formal input
into the operations of the Scheme and to share how their experience can be better reflected.
Following feedback from First Nations applicants and support services, an Indigenous Service
Delivery Stream was established in June 2020. The Indigenous Service Delivery Stream
includes First Nations and culturally proficient staff who provide culturally safe phone
contact with First Nations people.
The Australian Government funds specialist Redress Support Services to meet the diversity
of survivors’ needs. This includes 12 First Nations specific organisations that provide support
to and work with First Nations peoples to engage with the Scheme. In recognition of the need
to address barriers to accessing redress for First Nations peoples, the Scheme engages with
The Healing Foundation and offers bi-monthly meetings with First Nations specific Redress
Support Services to provide them the opportunity to raise barriers to accessing redress for
First Nations people. The department has also held a Survivor Roundtable in Darwin on
15 June 2021, focusing on identifying issues in relation to Indigenous engagement and the
Scheme’s operation in Northern Australia, and going forward is seeking to participate in
similar First Nations engagements annually.
Additionally, the Australian Government has implemented strategies to improve engagement
and communication with First Nations Australians through a range of measures, including:
 Canvas 3, a First Nations-focused workforce and justice consultancy organisation, was
engaged from July 2020 to June 2021 to develop First Nations community engagement
tools and resources.
 The Healing Foundation was engaged from October 2018 to 30 September 2022 to
provide advice, assistance and culturally appropriate community-based support and
materials to other support services, including access to interpreting and cultural
translation services.
 In June 2021, Gilimbaa Pty Ltd implemented a communication and engagement plan
developed for First Nations Australians living in northern Australia. The activities
focused on building trust in the Scheme among survivors and raising awareness of the
Redress Support Services.
4
 More accessible communication materials were launched on the Scheme website to
help meet the needs of those facing literacy, language and other barriers.
 The department has engaged specialist public relations agencies to support the
development of a communication strategy that is tailored to the diverse needs of
survivors, including Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander and culturally and
linguistically diverse survivors. Indigenous owned and operated firm, Carbon
Creative, was contracted in December 2022 and is in the process of developing a suite
of communications products aimed at increasing awareness of the Scheme, to be
distributed in 2023. The communication resources will be informed by research
conducted by Whereto Research, contracted in January 2023, who are engaging with
First Nations and other survivors, family members and supporters to consult on
communication design and efficacy of products. Carbon Creative has also invested in
stakeholder research with First Nations communities specifically through an
Indigenous psychologist and trauma informed specialist.
 A consortium of Redress Support Services in New South Wales has been funded to
undertake a series of community engagement workshops to raise awareness of the
Scheme and support services among intermediary organisations. This has included
two workshops aimed at organisations engaging with Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people in Redfern and Mount Druitt, with a further workshop planned in
Dubbo. A Redress Support Service in Victoria has recently been funded to undertake
a similar project, aimed at raising awareness among intermediary organisations
engaging with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in Victoria.
 Funding has also been provided to the Northern Territory government to undertake
community awareness raising and engagement activities in collaboration with Redress
Support Services and knowmore Legal Service in 2023. This will include
implementing key recommendations from a previous community engagement project
funded in the Northern Territory in 2021.
The Service Charter was also launched in September 2022. This resource provides more
information for people who apply or are thinking of applying to the Scheme, and helps ensure
the Scheme is supporting survivors as effectively as it can.
The Australian Government is committed to improving the Scheme and will continue to work
with First Nations survivors and advocacy groups to improve engagement and consultation.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that formal evaluation of redress support services be established
to ensure that the needs of survivors and their families are being met through professional
and timely engagement.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
5
As outlined in the final response to the Second Year Review, the Australian Government
commissioned an external independent evaluation of the service delivery practices of Redress
Support Services to ensure they are trauma informed, culturally safe and survivor focused which
was completed in June 2022. This has informed the development of the Redress Support
Services Maturity Framework (the Framework) to help better understand the current and target
maturity of a service’s practice in delivering trauma informed, culturally safe, survivor centred
care. The Framework is being used to guide best practice and is included in training and
education for Redress Support Service staff.
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the National Redress Scheme engage additional redress
support services in regional, rural and remote areas that offer face-to-face support.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
As outlined in the final response to the Second Year Review, the Australian Government has
expanded the network of Redress Support Services from 1 July 2022, including 15 new Redress
Support Services covering more areas of Australia and bringing the total number to 45. This
increases survivors’ access to free, confidential, practical and emotional support relating to the
Scheme. There is extensive coverage across each state and territory, including to regional, rural
and remote areas where face-to-face support is offered. There are 12 First Nations specific
organisations, providing improved services for First Nations Australians, as well as services
supporting people with disability, and culturally and linguistically diverse communities.
The Australian Government also funds knowmore Legal Service to deliver dedicated legal
support and financial counselling services for survivors across Australia.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that the National Redress Scheme consider expanding current
funding arrangements to provide after hours and weekend specialist services.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in principle.
As mentioned above, the Australian Government has expanded the network of Redress Support
Services. Some Redress Support Services offer 24/7 telephone support or appointments after
hours on request.
The full list of Redress Support Services and their opening hours is available on the Scheme’s
website.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends that the National Redress Scheme produce public education
materials to clearly explain and demonstrate how the assessment framework is applied to
applications by Independent Decision Makers.
The Australian government supports this recommendation.
6
A range of resources are readily available on the Scheme’s website. Publicly available
information for survivors who are thinking of applying to the Scheme is being reviewed and
updated to provide further guidance that is easy to understand.
The Scheme is expanding these resources, including the development of a guide to support
applicants and their nominees when completing the new application form. The guide is a
separate resource which will provide information about how to assist the Independent Decision
Maker to make their assessment against the legislation.
In addition, the National Redress Guide within the Guides to Social Policy Law on the
Department of Social Services website contains publicly accessible information about the
Scheme, its application and review processes and the requirements of Independent Decision
Makers when assessing applications. The Guide also provides information about institutions and
their obligations in providing redress when determined responsible for abuse under the Scheme.
The Australian Government continues to encourage survivors to utilise Redress Support Services
to assist in the application process. The full list of Redress Support Services is available on the
Scheme’s website.
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends that the National Redress Scheme introduce annual mandatory
training requirements for Independent Decision Makers and that the agreed minimum
training requirements are published for survivors to understand.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in principle.
Independent Decision Makers are required to undergo extensive training before commencing
with the Scheme, including a comprehensive induction program that is role based, covering
topics such as safeguarding information, the application journey and the reasonable likelihood
standard of proof. Further, Independent Decision Maker workshops are undertaken twice yearly
and are facilitated by the Chief Independent Decision Maker Panel and Scheme staff. These
workshops focus on topics relating to decision making with the emphasis on developing a
consistent understanding and approach by the Independent Decision Maker cohort. The role of
Chief Independent Decision Makers is outlined in further detail in the response to
Recommendation 8.
As outlined in the final response to the Second Year Review, internal Scheme guidance material
and training for staff and Independent Decision Makers will continue to support consistent
understanding and operation of relevant decision-making thresholds and processes.
Independent Decision Makers use an established Decision and Resource Library designed by
the Independent Decision Makers, for the Independent Decision Makers. Contained in the
library are refresher training sessions and documents on a range of decision making topics.
The Scheme updates internal guidance and training provided to Independent Decision Makers
as part of continual improvement efforts to support quality decision-making. Chief Independent
Decision Makers have been engaged to help meet this need and provide input into the content
of training programs and internal guidance material, ensuring that educational material is
experience-based, and benefits learning.
7
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommends that the National Redress Scheme implement an internal
moderation and review process for all application determinations prior to being finalised.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
All applications received by the Scheme are assessed on a case by case basis in accordance with
the legislation. The Scheme provides relevant and available information to Independent
Decision Makers to support informed and impartial decision making.
The Scheme has a range of quality assurance measures and guidance in place to improve quality
and consistency in all of the Scheme’s administrative decision-making processes, including
redress determinations. These activities help identify themes, trends and opportunities to inform
a knowledge base and to support continual improvement. These measures are designed to
support Independent Decision Makers in identifying and implementing quality improvements
when undertaking their administrative statutory obligations, including exercising powers and
performing functions under the National Redress Scheme for Institutional Child Sexual Abuse
Act 2018.
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends that the National Redress Scheme amend current review
processes to:
 ensure that applications are only reviewed by senior Independent Decision Makers,
and
 allow survivors to provide additional materials on matters raised by Independent
Decision Makers.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in part.
As outlined in the final response to the Second Year Review, a Chief Independent Decision
Maker Panel (the Panel) was established in March 2022, which provides support and leadership
to Independent Decision Makers, including:
 providing advice on complex applications;
 training, coaching and mentoring Independent Decision Makers;
 helping inform new scheme processes and identifying support and training needs for
Independent Decision Makers; and
 quality assurance activities to help identify opportunities to inform a knowledge base and
to support continual improvement.
The Panel provides advice as required on decisions made on review, however, will not
exclusively work on all reviews to avoid delays in processing.
The Australian Government, as well as state and territory governments as partners in the
Scheme, have agreed to make changes which would allow applicants to provide additional
information with a request for review of their redress offer. This will ensure that decisions are
based on all information that is relevant and available to the application.
8
The changes will also introduce a ‘no worse off’ provision to ensure redress offers are not
reduced on review due to a differing interpretation by the reviewing Independent Decision
Maker. This means a less beneficial decision could not be reached based on the same evidence.
For Scheme integrity, reviewed decisions will still be able to be adjusted to account for new
information.
The Australian Government will progress required legislative amendments to implement the
above measure.
Recommendation 9
The Committee recommends that the National Redress Scheme eliminate the practice of
indexing prior payments made to survivors.
The Australian Government does not support this recommendation.
As outlined in the final response to the Second Year Review, in September 2021, following
agreement by all governments, the Parliament passed the National Redress Scheme for
Institutional Child Sexual Abuse Amendment Act 2021 so that indexation of prior payments is
calculated from the date a person submitted their application, rather than the date the Scheme
makes a determination.
This change results in a fairer outcome for all applicants, as they are not disadvantaged by the
time taken to finalise an application.
The Australian Government does not support removal of indexation in its entirety.
The adjustment of prior payments to account for indexation was a recommendation of the
Royal Commission. The change to the date indexation is calculated ensures equity and
consistency when calculating relevant prior payments made to applicants. The Ministers’
Redress Scheme Governance Board considered these issues and reached this position.
Recommendation 10
The Committee recommends that the National Redress Scheme commence indexing awards
to an inflation measure.
The Australian Government does not support this recommendation.
This was not a recommendation of the Second Year Review, which made several
recommendations regarding redress payments but no changes to the maximum monetary
amount. Increasing redress payments to align with inflation over the life of the Scheme would
have significant cost implications and may risk the ability or willingness for institutions to
participate in the Scheme. A key element of the Scheme’s operation is that institutions
voluntarily join the Scheme, and in doing so commit to pay for redress where they are found
responsible for the abuse. Maintaining this participation is essential for the viability of the
Scheme, and to ensuring access to redress for as many survivors as possible.
9
Recommendation 11
The Committee recommends that the National Redress Scheme consider amending the
National Redress Scheme Rules so that the total financial award limit applies to each
institution found responsible for institutional child sexual abuse, instead of each application.
The Australian Government does not support this recommendation.
This was not a recommendation of the Second Year Review or the Royal Commission. This
would constitute a major Scheme design change and could significantly increase the liability of
institutions; this may risk the ability or willingness for institutions to join or continue to
participate in the Scheme. As noted above, institutions join the Scheme voluntarily, and
maintaining maximum participation is essential for the Scheme’s viability and to ensuring
access to redress for as many survivors as possible.
Implementing such a change would also introduce complex issues of equity and
re-traumatisation risks, noting the Scheme has issued over 13,400 outcomes to redress
applicants.
The maximum payment of $150,000 per application is designed to offer both maximum
recognition to people who experienced institutional child sexual abuse and maximum
opportunity for institutions to participate in the Scheme.
Recommendation 12
The Committee recommends that the National Redress Scheme undertake work with
survivors and redress support services to determine appropriate alternative methods for the
initiation of Direct Personal Responses and best practice guidelines.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
As outlined in the final response to the Second Year Review, access to a DPR is a significant
and important element of redress. Extensive consultation has been undertaken with state and
territory partners, participating non-government institutions, Redress Support Services and
survivor advocacy groups to help inform improvements to the DPR process.
A DPR Action Plan has seen a range of activities implemented to reduce barriers to DPR
take-up, improve the quality of DPRs and improve DPR data collection and reporting,
including:
 improving information and support available for survivors, including through the
establishment of the DPR Information and Support service, which has received 894
referrals as at 15 June 2023;
 enhancing DPR training, education and information resources for institutions, Redress
Support Services and professional facilitators, including with the expertise of a
restorative engagement specialist; and
 Strengthening the DPR evidence base and reporting.
10
Recommendation 13
The Committee recommends that the National Redress Scheme undertake consultation to
amend the application form as a matter of priority. The amended form should be designed
for survivors who may have low levels of literacy and allow care leavers to self-identify.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
As outlined in the final response to the Second Year Review, consultation and co-design with
survivors and support services has informed enhanced processes across the Scheme and led to
significant enhancements and simplifications to Scheme forms. Removal of the witnessed
statutory declaration requirement has resulted in a simpler application process, particularly for
survivors in regional, rural and remote communities.
Updates to the application form contain design and language changes to make it easier to
understand and use, including questions being redesigned regarding vulnerability and out of
home care. An amended application form will be implemented in late 2023 following
appropriate user testing and systems changes.
Recommendation 14
The Committee recommends that the National Redress Scheme commence a series of face-
to-face education sessions across Australia targeting known under-represented groups and
regions. All sessions should be run by senior National Redress Scheme employees and make
provision for a question and answer component.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in principle.
As outlined in the final response to the Second Year Review, research into awareness of the
Scheme and the best communication methods to reach survivors, frontline service providers and
the general community was completed in 2022. Outcomes of the research have informed the
development of a range of educational and communication activities aimed at connecting
particular survivor groups with the Scheme. Materials will support different audiences, including
First Nations communities, people with disability, those with culturally and linguistically diverse
backgrounds and rural and remote Australians.
The Australian Government has funded specialist Culturally and Linguistically Diverse and
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communication service providers to ensure Redress
education and communication materials meet the needs of survivors with diverse backgrounds.
The materials are trauma informed and focus on guiding survivors to a support service or
stakeholder network and ensure the survivor feels culturally safe.
The Australian Government has also funded a number of Redress Support Services to undertake
community engagement activities, including face-to-face workshops, aimed at raising awareness
of the Scheme among under-represented groups, community services and other intermediary
organisations that support them. Additional workshops are being planned across different states
and redress staff have, and will continue to, participate in these workshops as needed.
11
The Survivor Roundtable is another important mechanism through which senior National
Redress Scheme staff speak with survivors, support organisations and advocacy groups
including to seek their feedback and experiences of the Scheme and provide the latest Scheme
reforms.
Recommendation 15
The Committee recommends that the National Redress Scheme engage additional free legal
services for survivors to access.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in principle.
The Australian Government, through the Attorney-General’s Department, funds knowmore
Legal Service to deliver free, quality, trauma-informed, culturally-sensitive legal advice to
survivors of institutional child sexual abuse on their legal options for accessing redress and
assistance under the Scheme. As well as maintaining a national trauma-informed legal practice
providing free legal advice, knowmore maintains referral arrangements to private lawyers for
assistance with claims falling outside the Redress Scheme.
The Department of Social Services and the Attorney-General’s department will continue to
assess the adequacy of funding for the provision of legal services for survivors.
Recommendation 16
The Committee recommends that the National Redress Scheme identify and fund legal
services that can provide face-to-face, culturally diverse and trauma informed legal advice
across regional, rural, and remote centres.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
knowmore Legal Service provides free legal advice and practical assistance for survivors and
provides support workers, financial counsellors and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
engagement staff who can support survivors with their redress applications in a culturally safe
and trauma-informed way. knowmore has male and female Aboriginal Engagement Advisers
(AEA) based in Adelaide, Darwin, Sydney, Brisbane, Melbourne and Perth. They are also able
to facilitate support from a non-Aboriginal member of staff for Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people who do not wish to speak to an AEA. knowmore has also recently engaged an
Elder in Residence who both supports clients and assists in ensuring knowmore’s policies and
practices are culturally safe.
Survivors can speak to knowmore using the free telephone advice line or face-to-face in one of
their six offices around Australia. knowmore also regularly travels to locations around Australia
offering face-to-face information, community legal education and advice sessions.
12
Recommendation 17
The Committee recommends that the Ministers’ Redress Scheme Governance Board prioritise
preventing the exploitation of survivors by private law firms and works to immediately
implement the following measures:
 Make it unlawful for lawyers to charge contingency fees for services delivered with
respect to National Redress Scheme applications;
 Impose a legal obligation on lawyers to advise a potential client of the availability of
free services (knowmore and the Redress Support Services), and to certify such advice
has been provided, before executing a costs agreement for a National Redress Scheme
application;
 Considering a cap on fees that lawyers can charge for services delivered with respect
to National Redress Scheme applications;
 Make it an offence for any person to:
o contact a person without their consent and solicit or induce them to make a
National Redress Scheme application; or
o give or receive any money or other benefit in exchange for a referral to make
a National Redress Scheme application;
 Establish a set of expected practice standards for lawyers and survivor advocates
providing services with respect to National Redress Scheme applications; and
 Establish a specific complaints process within the National Redress Scheme to deal
with concerns about the conduct of lawyers and representatives from survivor
advocacy businesses.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in principle.
The Australian Government will continue to promote access to the Scheme, including access to
free support services to reduce the risks to survivors.
While there are limited levers for the Commonwealth to regulate private law firms, the Scheme
has implemented communication and engagement strategies to address the concerns being
raised about the practices of private law firms, including:
 Writing to law societies in each jurisdiction to provide advice on the Scheme and
supports that are available for survivors;
 Sponsoring key search terms and making website updates to improve the Scheme
website search results position in comparison to private law firms;
 Updating the Scheme’s website and other letters and forms to emphasise the availability
of free legal support through knowmore Legal Service;
 Developing a Fact Sheet for the Scheme website containing information for applicants
to consider if hiring a lawyer and how to make a complaint to a professional body about
a private law firm’s practices; and
13
 Making changes to the legislation to restrict the use of the Scheme name and logo
without the Operator’s consent, to stop businesses representing themselves as connected
to the Scheme.
Consideration of additional measures is ongoing between all governments. The Scheme has
seen a decrease in the proportion of applications received where the applicant has identified
they receive support from a legal service, other than knowmore, in their application form. This
may indicate the prevalence of these issues is restricted to a small number of private law firms.
The Scheme continues to welcome feedback regarding the experiences of survivors pursuing
redress through the Scheme or through civil litigation.
Recommendation 18
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with all Australian states
and territories to examine child safety measures in relation to institutions that refuse to join
the National Redress Scheme.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
The Scheme has established child safe reporting arrangements in place. Where the Scheme
receives information, which could indicate that the safety or wellbeing of a child may be at risk,
the Scheme will make a report to relevant state or territory police or child protection services.
Beyond the Scheme, the National Office for Child Safety (National Office), within the
Australian Government Attorney-General’s Department, leads the development and
implementation of several national priorities recommended by the Royal Commission,
including:
 The National Strategy to Prevent and Respond to Child Sexual Abuse 2021-2030
(National Strategy)
 The National Principles for Child Safe Organisations
 The Australian Government’s child safety policy (the Commonwealth Child Safe
Framework)
 Improvements to information sharing arrangements to strengthen child safety and
wellbeing.
The National Office has previously invited organisations that declined to join the Scheme to
submit an annual progress report on their actions to improve child safety practices and culture,
particularly in relation to recommendations of the Royal Commission.
The Royal Commission recommended that the Australian, state and territory governments,
along with non-government organisations and peak bodies that work with children, report on
how they are implementing the recommendations made in the Royal Commission’s Final
Report (published December 2017). The Royal Commission recommended that relevant
government and non-government institutions first report within 12 months of the Final Report,
with progress reports to be submitted every year for five years concluding in 2022. The aim of
this reporting is to ensure that institutions and their leaders are accountable for their actions to
their communities and to the public.
14
Under the National Strategy, the National Office is developing an ongoing national annual
reporting framework for non-government organisations to report on their progress to create and
maintain child safe cultures. The National Office will work with the Department of Social
Services to consider application of the reporting framework to organisations that decline to join
the Scheme.
The combination of actions taken by governments to encourage institutions to join and
participate in the Scheme, including financial consequences, has helped minimise the number
of institutions which are unwilling to join the Scheme.
Recommendation 19
The Committee recommends that funder of last resort arrangements are expanded to ensure
that survivors of institutions who are unable or unwilling to join the National Redress Scheme
are able to receive all components of redress.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in part.
As outlined in the final response to the Second Year Review, following agreement by all
governments, the Parliament passed the National Redress Scheme for Institutional Child Sexual
Abuse Amendment (Funders of Last Resort and Other Measures) Act 2021, which extended the
Scheme’s funder of last resort arrangements.
The arrangements encompass institutions that are unable to join the Scheme, and defunct
institutions where governments do not share responsibility for abuse and where there is no
parent institution to take responsibility. The arrangements also enable institutions that do not
have the financial capacity to provide redress to still provide a DPR to survivors.
It is the Australian Government’s position that funder of last resort arrangements should not
apply when an institution named in an application is able to join but has declined, as this could
decrease the willingness of institutions to join the Scheme. Understanding that a survivor of
child sexual abuse is relying on their participation is a critical reason supporting many
institutions’ decision to join the Scheme. The participation of institutions in providing redress
is an integral part of the Scheme’s design.
Recommendation 20
The Committee recommends that funder of last resort provisions be expanded to ensure that
all survivors can access the National Redress Scheme if they wish to do so.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in part.
To date, there are currently over 480 non-government institutions participating in the Scheme
as well as all Commonwealth and State and Territory government institutions.
Legislated expanded funder of last resort arrangements also cover applications that name
non-government institutions that are defunct with no parent institution or are existing
non-government institutions that are unable to join the Scheme. Institutions named in an
application who are able to join, or who have a parent entity which has financial capacity to
join, should do so, as a key element of the Scheme is holding institutions responsible for the
abuse of survivors.
15
The Australian Government will continue to work with non-government institutions and state
and territory partners to ensure as many survivors as possible can access the Scheme.
Recommendation 21
The Committee recommends that the future Parliament consider the establishment of a
parliamentary committee to continue the work of providing oversight on the administration
and operation of the National Redress Scheme.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation, and will continue to support the
work of the Joint Standing Committee on Implementation of the National Redress Scheme,
such as through ongoing participation in briefings and public hearings. The department
participated in private briefings on 15 September and 24 October 2022, and public hearings on
9 March and 12 April 2023.
The Joint Standing Committee was appointed by resolution of the House of Representatives on
26 July 2022 and resolution of the Senate on 27 July 2022.
The Committee has been established to inquire into and report on:
(a) The Australian Government policy, program and legal response to the redress related
recommendations of the Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child
Sexual Abuse, including the establishment and operation of the Commonwealth Redress
Scheme and ongoing support of survivors; and
(b) Any matter in relation to the Royal Commission’s redress related recommendations
referred to the Committee by a Minister or by resolution of either House of the
Parliament.
16
