Australian Government response to the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security report:
Review of the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security and
Other Legislation Amendment (Modernisation) Bill 2022
JULY 2023
1
Australian Government response to the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security report
Review of the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security and Other Legislation
Amendment (Modernisation) Bill 2022
The Government thanks the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security
(‘Committee’) for its review of the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security and Other
Legislation Amendment (Modernisation) Bill 2022 (the ‘Bill’).
The Government provides the following responses to the Committee’s recommendations.
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider amendments to
the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security Act 1986 (‘IGIS Act’) and the
Intelligence Services Act 2001 (‘IS Act’) to provide for greater information sharing
between the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security (‘IGIS’) and the Parliamentary
Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security.
The Committee recommends that the Government report to the Committee within
twelve months of the presentation of this report on the outcomes of such consideration.
The Government accepts the Committee’s recommendation.
The Government acknowledges the important but different oversight roles performed by
the Committee and the IGIS. A robust relationship between both bodies is important and
assists each body in performance of its functions.
The Government will consider what changes, if any, are required to provide for potentially
greater information sharing between the Committee and the IGIS. The Government will
report back to the Committee on the outcomes of these considerations within 12 months.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that item 86 of Schedule 1 of the Inspector-General of
Intelligence and Security and Other Legislation Amendment (Modernisation) Bill 2022
be amended to align the provisions relating to abrogation of legal professional privilege
with equivalent provisions in the legislation governing other integrity agencies.
The Government notes the Committee’s recommendation.
The Government acknowledges the importance of legal professional privilege as it serves
the public interest in the administration of justice. The proper administration of justice
requires that clients are able to communicate freely and frankly with their lawyer, without
fear of disclosing any information relevant to the legal advice they are seeking.
2
Section 18(6)(b) of the IGIS Act currently provides for the limited abrogation of legal
professional privilege that is held by the Commonwealth. The IGIS Act does not operate to
abrogate the privilege held by private individuals or entities who may seek legal advice
about their rights or liabilities in their dealings with a Commonwealth agency. This reflects
the long-standing role of the IGIS to oversee the activities of agencies—rather than
individuals—for legality, propriety and compliance with human rights. In reaching its own
view on the legality of agencies’ activities, the IGIS can be assisted by understanding how
the agency itself considered the activity was lawful.
However, section 18(6)(b) of the IGIS Act applies only to the disclosure of the legal advice
itself and not the communications that are made for the dominant purpose of giving legal
advice. The amendments contained in the Bill would ensure that the duty to comply with
section 18 notices to provide information or documents addresses both the ‘advice’ and
‘litigation’ limbs of legal professional privilege as recognised in sections 118 and 119 of the
Evidence Act 1995.
As the Explanatory Memorandum provides, if passed, the amendments will avoid the
situation where a technical argument about what constitutes ‘advice’ could excuse a person
(who provides legal advice to the Commonwealth Government) from giving information to
the IGIS as part of an inquiry.
As recognised in submissions made to the Committee, these amendments are consistent
with equivalent provisions in the legislation governing other integrity agencies, including
section 9(4)(ab) of the Ombudsman Act 1976 and section 96(5) of the Law Enforcement
Integrity Commissioner Act 2006 (now repealed).1
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the Office of National Intelligence develop an
employment framework governing staff members that may be engaged under
subsection 33(1)(b) of the Office of National Intelligence Act 2018.
The Office of National Intelligence should report to the Committee in 12 months on
progress towards implementing this recommendation.
The Government accepts the Committee’s recommendation.
The Office of National Intelligence (ONI) will commence development of an employment
framework governing staff members that may be engaged under the Office of National
Intelligence Act 2018.
ONI will report back to the Committee on the progress of this work within 12 months.
1 Law Council of Australia, Submission 3, pp. 14-15.
3
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider amendments to
the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security and Other Legislation Amendment
(Modernisation) Bill 2022 to prescribe that a person would be ineligible for appointment
to the role of Inspector-General for an appropriate period of time to be determined by
the Government, following employment in an intelligence agency.
The Government notes the Committee’s recommendation.
The Bill provides that a person who is, or whose most recent position was, the head of an
intelligence agency within IGIS’ jurisdiction is not eligible to be appointed as the
Inspector-General immediately after they finish their role within an intelligence agency.
This amendment addresses the most acute circumstances where actual or perceived conflict
of interest are likely to result in an undermining of trust in the IGIS.
However, the Government does not consider that all prior experience with an intelligence
agency would necessarily amount to an actual or perceived conflict of interest. It is
important that the Government has discretion to consider all of the circumstances and is
not arbitrarily prevented from choosing the ideal candidate.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends that, following implementation of the recommendations in
this report, the Bill be passed by the Parliament.
The Government accepts the Committee’s recommendation.
4
