Australian Government

Australian Government response to the
Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade
Inquiry into international armed conflict decision making

August 2023

Introduction

The Australian Government welcomes the final report by the Joint Standing Committee on Foreign
Affairs, Defence and Trade’s Defence Sub-committee (JSCFADT Sub-committee) on its inquiry into
international armed conflict decision making. The report follows the referral of the matter for inquiry
by the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Defence in September 2022.

The inquiry was a timely opportunity to examine a matter of considerable public and parliamentary
interest. During the conduct of its inquiry, the JSCFADT Sub-committee engaged with diverse
perspectives on this matter of importance. The Government appreciates the constructive and
considered approach taken by the JSCFADT Sub-committee to weighing the importance of open and
accountable decision-making by the Executive with the unique national security considerations that
necessarily arise when deploying Australian personnel into international armed conflict.

The Government considers the defence of Australia, its people, and its interests to be its most
important responsibility. In fulfilling this responsibility, one of the most consequential options
available to government is the deployment of Australian service personnel into international armed
conflict — including all major war-like and peacekeeping operations by the Australian Defence Force
(ADF). The gravity of such decisions cannot be overstated — an assessment clearly shared and affirmed
over the course of the inquiry by all participants.

The decision to commit the ADF to armed conflict has long been a prerogative of the Executive, with
this authority exercised in practice by the Prime Minister and the National Security Committee of
Cabinet. The existing arrangements support timely and flexible decision making as well as the security
of highly-classified information that is necessary for governments to make critical decisions. This
enables the ADF to effectively and efficiently deploy into contested environments while also affording
the highest possible protection to its members.

The Government acknowledges, however, that this should not detract from the important role of the
Parliament in debating matters of national importance and holding the Executive to account for the
decisions it has taken. An appropriate balance must be achieved that maintains the capacity of the
Executive of the day to respond ina timely and effective manner to challenges to our national interests
and national security whilst also providing the Parliament — and through it, the Australian people —
with effective mechanisms to examine and debate the decisions taken by government. Maintaining
an appropriate balance between these considerations serves to strengthen the openness and
accountability that is fundamental to our democracy.

In response to the inquiry’s final report, the Government reaffirms its commitment to improving
openness and accountability, including with respect to decisions to commit Australian service
personnel to international armed conflict.

The Government welcomes and supports the principal finding that decisions regarding armed conflict
are fundamentally a prerogative of the Executive. The Government broadly agrees with the inquiry’s
findings on the importance of clarifying the processes by which such decisions are made as well as
codifying practices relating to informing the Parliament about such decisions.

The Government notes, in particular, the recommendations relating to the establishment of a new
Joint Statutory Committee on Defence. The Government supports the establishment of such a
committee and agrees that there would be substantial benefit in a mechanism for the proposed
committee to receive classified information. The Government notes that this would be a significant
step in improving parliamentary oversight and a substantial change to existing arrangements. The
Government notes, therefore, that further work will be required to determine the precise scope,
powers and functions of the proposed committee, particularly to avoid the potential for duplication
and/or overlapping responsibilities with existing committees. The Government is committed to taking
this work forward in a timely manner.

The Government thanks the JSCFADT Sub-Committee members for their work in delivering the
report and its recommendations, including considering 113 submissions and conducting a public
hearing.

Response to the report recommendations

Recommendation 1

The Committee recommends that in implementing these recommendations the Government
reaffirm that decisions regarding armed conflict including war or warlike operations are
fundamentally a prerogative of the Executive, while acknowledging the key role of parliament
in considering such decisions, and the value of improving the transparency and accountability of
such decision making and the conduct of operations.

Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.

The Government welcomes the reaffirmation by the JSFADT Sub-committee that decisions
regarding armed conflict, including war or war-like operations, are fundamentally a prerogative of

the Executive.

The Government acknowledges the key role of the Parliament in giving voice to the views of the
Australian people on matters of national importance, including with regard to Australia’s
involvement in international armed conflict, and in holding the Executive to account for the
decisions it has taken.


Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that the Cabinet Handbook be amended to clarify that:

e Executive power in relation to armed conflict and the deployment of military force flows
from section 61 of the Constitution
© Inthe modern era, Executive power is in practice exercised collectively via the National
Security Committee of the Cabinet, whose decisions can be given effect via section 8 of
the Defence Act or by advice to the Governor-General as Commander in Chief under
section 68 of the Constitution
® Inthe event of war or warlike operations:
© Itis preferable that section 68 of the Constitution be utilised, particularly in
relation to conflicts that are not supported by resolution by the United Nations
Security Council, or an invitation of a sovereign nation given that complex
matters of legality in public international law may arise in respect of an
overseas commitment of that nature
© Awritten Statement be published and tabled in the Parliament setting out the
objectives of such major military operations, the orders made and its legal basis

Response:

The Government agrees in-principle that there is a need for greater clarity and transparency about
the way that the Executive makes decisions in relation to Australia becoming a party to armed
conflict.

The decision to deploy ADF forces into international armed conflict is among the most significant
decisions that can be made by the Executive. Such decisions are an exercise of prerogative power
under section 61 of the Constitution. in the Australian system of responsible and representative
government this is a decision for the elected Government and not the Governor-General.

The Government thus supports codifying these practices to clarify that:

1. the executive power in relation to armed conflict and the deployment of military forces
flows from section 61 of the Constitution;

2. the executive power is in practice exercised collectively via the National Security Committee
of Cabinet; and

3. when the ADF is engaged in major military operations as a party to an armed conflict, a
written statement should be published and tabled in Parliament setting out the objectives
of those major military operations, the orders made and its legal basis.

The Government reserves its right to determine the appropriateness of disclosures with respect to
questions of international law and advice on questions of legality.

The Government does not agree that the Cabinet Handbook is the appropriate mechanism for
codifying these practices. However, the Government will publish on the Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet’s website, alongside the Cabinet Handbook, a Statement on international
armed conflict decision making, to codify these practices

=


Recommendation 3

The Committee recommends the Government include a new section in the Cabinet Handbook
outlining expectations for practices to be followed in the event of a decision to engage in major
international armed conflict including war or warlike operations. This should include:

¢ Arequirement that the Parliament be recalled as soon as possible to be advised, unless
this was not possible due to extenuating and appropriate circumstances (e.g., it was
unsafe for the Parliament to meet due to conflict)

e Arequirement that the Executive facilitate a debate in both Houses of Parliament at the
earliest opportunity, either prior to deployment of the Australian Defence Force or
within thirty (30) days of deployment. Debate should occur after a formal ministerial
statement is made which explains the reasons for the operation, based on the 2010
Gillard model, as well as a statement of compliance with international law and advice
as to the legality of the operation

These practices should contain the caveat that the Governor-General is able to approve deferral
of any of these requirements in specific circumstances, such as high risks to national security or
imminent threat to Australian territories or civilian lives.

Response:

The Government broadly agrees that there would be a benefit in outlining the practices to be
followed in the event of a decision to deploy the ADF to major military operations as a party to an
armed conflict.

The Government agrees that a Ministerial statement to inform a timely debate in both Houses of
Parliament is an important mechanism to improve transparency and public debate in relation to a
decision of the Executive to engage in major military operations as a party to an armed conflict and
this should include the legal basis for the resort to armed force. The Government further agrees
that this should occur at the earliest opportunity and not later than 30 days from the deployment
of the ADF, subject to any considerations of national security or imminent threat to Australian
territories or civilian lives.

The Government reserves its right to determine the appropriateness of disclosures with respect to
questions of international law and advice on questions of legality.

As noted in Recommendation 2, the Government will publish a Statement on international armed
conflict decision making, to codify these practices.


| Recommendation 4

The Committee recommends the Government introduce standing resolutions of both Houses of
Parliament to establish Parliament’s expectations in relation to accountability for decisions in
relation to international armed conflict, providing for sensible exemptions to enable timely and
flexible national security responses and requiring at a minimum that, when war or warlike
operations are occurring:

e aStatement to both Houses of Parliament be made at least annually from the Prime
Minister and Government Senate Leader and debate facilitated

e an Update to both Houses of Parliament be provided at other times during the year (at
least twice) from the Minister for Defence and Minister representing the Minister for
Defence in the other Chamber and debate facilitated

These practices should be replicated in the Cabinet Handbook
Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.

The Government supports steps to improve openness, accountability and public discussion on
Australia’s involvement in international armed conflict. The Government will implement this
recommendation, noting the statements and updates will include unclassified information only.

The Government will codify these practices in a Statement on international armed conflict decision
making, to be published on the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet’s website.

Recommendation 5

The Committee recommends the Government:

¢ Revert to a traditional approach whereby Defence white papers and national security or
strategy updates should be tabled in both Houses of Parliament within 30 days of their
presentation to the Minister

¢ consider and apply mechanisms to codify this practice, such as embedding them in the
Cabinet Handbook or by Standing Resolutions of both Houses of Parliament

Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.

The Government supports the tabling of publicly-released Defence strategy documents in both
Houses of Parliament within 30 days of their publication. These Defence strategy documents
encompass those that are broad in nature, significant to Australia’s national defence and contain
unclassified information only, such as Defence white papers and Defence strategic reviews.

These practices will be in codified in a Statement on international armed conflict decision making.


Recommendation 6

The Committee recommends the Government introduce legislation to establish a Joint Statutory
Committee on Defence to supersede and enhance the Defence related functions currently
undertaken by the Joint Standing Committee of Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade. This
committee should have its powers set out in legislation, including oversight and accountability
functions in relation to the Australian Defence Force, the Department of Defence and specified
portfolio agencies including:

e scrutiny of Defence portfolio annual reports

e consideration of white papers, strategy, planning and contingencies

e scrutiny of Defence capability development, acquisitions, and sustainment

e consideration of matters relating to Defence personnel and veterans’ affairs

e inquiry into matters referred by the Minister for Defence or either House of Parliament

e general parliamentary oversight of war or warlike operations, including ongoing
conflicts and involvement in significant non-conflict-related operations domestically and
internationally

The proposed committee should be explicitly permitted to request and receive classified
information and general intelligence briefings while also being subject to clear legislative
constraints to its mandate, including restrictions on access to:

e individual domestic intelligence reports

e intelligence sourced from foreign intelligence bodies where such provision would breach
international agreements

e detail regarding operational matters or information regarding highly sensitive
capabilities or protected identities, except where specifically authorised by the Minister
for Defence

Statutory restrictions should be placed on members, their staff (one of whom should be able to
obtain a security clearance at minimum NV2 level) and secretariat staff regarding the disclosure
or publication of classified information with appropriate penalties including imprisonment for
breaches.

Notwithstanding the proposed committee’s powers and ability to receive and request classified
briefings, the legislation should also provide that the Minister for Defence should have an
overarching power to veto the provision of any classified information to the committee
whenever the Minister considers that the provision of the classified information in question
would compromise national security.

The committee’s membership should be appointed by the Prime Minister, and, in consultation
with the Leader of the Opposition, constituted by:

© Six Government members and five non-Government members, with a minimum of:
© One Government Member of the House and one Government Senator
o One Opposition Member of the House and one Opposition Senator

e One Government Member as committee chair


The Prime Minister and Minister for Defence should be provided with the ability to authorise
specified members of Parliament (Ministers or senior Opposition Shadow Ministers) to be part
of particular meetings, briefings or activities of the committee, during which they would not be
considered members of the committee but would be able to participate subject to the same
statutory restrictions regarding the disclosure or publication of classified information as
committee members.

Response:
The Government agrees with this recommendation.

The Government notes that this would be a significant change to existing arrangements and,
therefore, that further work will be required to determine the precise scope, powers and functions
of the proposed committee, particularly to avoid the potential for duplication and/or overlapping
responsibilities with existing committees.

The Government will conduct further work in a timely manner to determine the scope of the
proposed committee and its appropriate powers and functions.

Recommendation 7

The Committee recommends that, subject to Recommendation 6, the Cabinet Handbook codify
an expectation that the Prime Minister or Minister for Defence will facilitate appropriate
briefings of the Defence Committee regarding the conduct of significant military operations,
subject to ongoing national security considerations as determined by the Prime Minister and
Minister for Defence. This would include necessary authorisations to enable Ministers or senior
Opposition Shadow Ministers to participate in such meetings.

Response:

The Government agrees in-principle to this recommendation, subject to the further work described
in the response to Recommendation 6 and noting that the Government will codify these practices
in a Statement on international armed conflict decision making.


Response to Australian Greens additional comments

Recommendation: Parliament should pass Defence Amendment (Parliamentary Approval of Overseas
Service) Bill 2020 requiring a joint sitting of parliament to approve Australian Defence Force
deployments overseas.

Response:

The Government does not agree with this recommendation.

The Government notes that the inquiry examined the matter of how Australian service personnel are
deployed into international armed conflict in detail. The Government further notes that the majority
report of the inquiry reaffirmed the importance to Australia’s national security of the longstanding
principle that decisions regarding armed conflict, including war or war-like operations, are
fundamentally a prerogative of the Executive.

The Government also notes the named legislation has not been amended since its original tabling in
2020. As previously noted in the 2021 inquiry on the legislation, it was found by the then Committee
to have substantial evidentiary issues, which contributed to the recommendation it not proceed.

Recommendation: The Defence Act of 1903 should be amended to explicitly limit Ministerial Power
from unilaterally deciding on offensive troop deployments

Response:

The Government does not agree with this recommendation.

The Government notes that the inquiry examined the matter of how Australian service personnel are
deployed into international armed conflict in detail. The Government further notes that the majority
report of the inquiry reaffirmed the importance to Australia’s national security of the longstanding
principle that decisions regarding armed conflict, including war or war-like operations, are
fundamentally a prerogative of the Executive.

Recommendation: Legal Advice given to the Howard Government and Cabinet, the Governor-General
and Federal Executive Council should be made publicly available so that Australians can determine for
themselves what was understood about entering Iraq

Response:

The Government does not agree with this recommendation.

As a matter of convention, the government of the day does not publicly disclose the confidential
deliberations (including advice provided to inform cabinet decision making) of a former government.
This is a longstanding and fundamental practice in the Westminster system.

Recommendation: Any and all legal advice the government has or has sought on its interpretation of
Section 8 of the Defence Act as an alternative to Section 68 of the Australian Constitution should be
made publicly available

Response:

The Government does not agree with this recommendation.

As with the previous additional recommendation, as a matter of convention, the government of the
day does not publically disclose the confidential deliberations (including advice provided to inform
cabinet decision making) of a former government. This is a longstanding and fundamental practice in
the Westminster system.

