Australian Government response to the
Senate Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade References
Committee report
Human rights implications of recent violence in Iran
SEPTEMBER 2023
Executive Summary
The Australian Government appreciates the work of the Senate Foreign Affairs, Defence and
Trade References Committee. The Government welcomes the opportunity to respond to its
inquiry ‘Human rights implications of recent violence in Iran’ and to outline the practical
steps that have been actively employed or are under consideration in response to these human
rights abuses.
The whole-of-government response to the Committee’s recommendations has been
coordinated by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT), in consultation with
the following Commonwealth agencies:
• Attorney-General's Department (AGD)
• Australian Federal Police (AFP)
• Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (ASIO)
• Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC)
• Department of Home Affairs.
The Government supports the overarching principle of the report that it is crucial to hold the
Iranian regime to account for its egregious human rights abuses against the Iranian people,
including the violent crackdown on protests following the death of Ms Mahsa ‘Jina’ Amini.
However, the Government does not accept the Committee’s finding that Australia continues
to lag behind other nations in responding to the human rights abuses in Iran.
The Australian Government has been consistent, proactive and assertive in holding the
Iranian regime to account for its gross violations of human rights. Australia has condemned
Iran’s repression of protesters and its ongoing systematic discrimination against women and
girls, in public statements, jointly with partners and in multilateral forums such as the United
Nations Human Rights Council in Geneva.
Australia has been integral to building pressure internationally and was at the forefront of
efforts to remove Iran from the Commission for the Status of Women. Australia co-sponsored
and advocated for the establishment of an independent fact-finding mission to investigate
human rights violations in Iran.
The Australian Government has imposed three packages of sanctions on Iran in response to
the regime’s abhorrent abuses of human rights and brutal crackdown on protests and for
Iran’s continued provision of drones to Russia for use in its illegal and immoral war in
Ukraine.
The Australian Government has imposed sanctions on 56 individuals and 23 entities since the
protests began, including Iran’s Morality Police, the Basij Resistance Force, and senior
Iranian law enforcement, military, and Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) officials.
1
The Australian Government has amended the Iran autonomous sanctions framework to
include new criteria that allows the Minister for Foreign Affairs to sanction persons and
entities, involved in:
• the oppression of women and girls in Iran;
• the general oppression of people in Iran;
• undermining good governance or the rule of law in Iran; and
• assisting Iran to threaten or undermine the sovereignty or territorial integrity of
another country.
These changes will ensure that Australia is able to more quickly and effectively respond to
the oppression of the Iranian people, as well as Iran’s destabilising activities abroad.
The Australian Government has taken steps to limit Australia’s engagement with Iran where
it is in our interests to do so. In April 2023, the Minister for Foreign Affairs wrote to state
and territory governments, Australian public universities and university peak bodies,
encouraging these entities to put on hold any existing cooperation with Iranian entities and to
avoid engaging in any new initiatives.
The following Australian Government response addresses the Committee’s recommendations
and underscores the Government’s resolute support for the human rights of the people of
Iran. Three recommendations are accepted, seven are noted and two are not accepted. The
response notes most recommendations as Australia has either been actively pursuing or
considering many of the recommended courses of action or, in line with Australian
Government policy, we do not speculate on certain actions such as sanctions or listings under
the Criminal Code.
The Albanese Government has taken stronger action against Iran on human rights than any
previous Australian government. We will continue to deliberately and strategically put
pressure on the Iranian regime to uphold human rights.
2
Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government oppose the election of the
Islamic Republic of Iran to any United Nations’ bodies in light of the regime’s clear disregard
for human rights, particularly the rights of women and girls.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government is committed to the multilateral system, with the United Nations
at its centre.
We recognise that the multilateral system is fundamental to our interests.
As a middle power, we work judiciously and with partners to pursue our core interests
through the system, calibrating and prioritising our actions to ensure the most effective use of
finite Australian resources.
We will work to oppose the election of Islamic Republic of Iran, and that of other countries
and candidates, to United Nations’ bodies when it is in our interests to do so.
To this end, the Australian Government was at the forefront of efforts to remove Iran from
the UN Commission on the Status of Women, co-sponsoring the resolution that led to its
successful expulsion.
Australia also successfully advocated for and co-sponsored the UN Human Rights Council
(HRC) Special Session resolution on human rights in Iran calling for the establishment of an
independent Fact-Finding Mission.
The Australian Government has also registered our disappointment at Iran’s appointment as
Chair of the 2023 UN HRC Social Forum. We are deeply troubled that a country which so
blatantly disregards human rights continues to be appointed to positions of leadership in the
preeminent global body dedicated to promoting and protecting human rights for all people.
Australia made a national statement to the HRC, expressing our concerns with Iran’s human
rights violations. In this statement, Australia also asserted our solidarity with peaceful
protesters and called for accountability.
Australia will continue to advocate strongly in multilateral bodies, including the UN General
Assembly and HRC, to condemn Iran’s ongoing human rights abuses and violations,
especially its persecution of women and girls. Australia’s recent advocacy includes our
National Statement at the 52nd session of the HRC on 20 March 2023 and our advocacy for
3
the adoption of a strong draft resolution expressing concern of the human rights situation in
Iran at the 77th session of the UN General Assembly's Third Committee in November 2022.
4
Recommendation 2
The Committee is deeply concerned about credible allegations of intimidation and threats
against Australian citizens, residents and their families. It recommends that the responsible
Ministers provide an update to the Parliament and the Australian public on the government’s
current assessment of whether persons connected to the IRI regime are undertaking such
behaviour in Australia.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation in part.
The Minister for Home Affairs, the Hon Clare O’Neil MP, publicly attributed the
surveillance, harassment and intimidation of individuals in Australia to the Islamic Republic
of Iran (IRI) in her speech on 14 February 2023 (htttps://minister.homeaffairs.gov.au). The
Minister for Home Affairs has directed the National Counter Foreign Interference
Coordinator to develop an attribution framework for the Australian Government.
5
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government ensure there is an appropriate
level of expertise and resourcing in the relevant government departments and agencies,
including foreign language speakers and community liaison officers, available to quickly
investigate and assess threats against Australians.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation.
Commonwealth agencies work together to engage and support communities concerned or
affected by foreign interference.
The AFP and ASIO led Counter Foreign Interference (CFI) Taskforce was established in
2020 to discover, investigate and disrupt foreign interference. Where allegations of foreign
interference are raised, they are referred to the CFI Taskforce.
The Department of Home Affairs maintains a Community Liaison Officer (CLO) Network
not to investigate and assess, but to engage with key community groups on matters of
concern, including appropriate mechanisms to report allegations or concerns, and support a
two-way information flow with government. The CLO Network has strengthened its ability
to engage with culturally and linguistically diverse communities through the addition of
language specialist liaison officers.
The Department of Home Affairs also maintains state-based CFI engagement officers who
meet with community groups to strengthen resilience to foreign interference.
The AFP maintains Community Liaison Teams (CLTs) which have the primary aim of
building, supporting and managing productive, diverse and complex stakeholder relationships
and networks. CLTs work to ensure police legitimacy and trust through engagements
that strengthen social cohesion and community resilience, and inform and support the well-
being of vulnerable and at-risk members of diverse communities.
6
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that all reports of threats, intimidation, monitoring or
surveillance by the Iranian community in Australia are followed up, recorded, assessed and
reported to the lead coordination agency (regardless of whether individual reports result in a
criminal investigation) to ensure that the government has a complete picture of foreign
interference efforts by the IRI in Australia. The Committee further recommends that the
relevant agencies report to Parliament through the Joint Committee for Intelligence and
Security on such activities.
Response:
The Government does not accept this recommendation.
As part of the CFI Taskforce, ASIO and AFP staff operate under their own legislative powers
and mechanisms for reporting outcomes to Government.
All reports of foreign interference and espionage are currently considered, triaged and
assessed for investigation. This is prioritised through existing mechanisms of cooperation
between intelligence agencies and law enforcement, which includes and enables formal
information sharing between agencies where there is a relevance and requirement under
respective legislations.
As investigations are undertaken on a strict prioritisation of harm, the CFI Taskforce takes a
stringent country agnostic approach to investigations. Threats to public safety, threatening of
family members, forced repatriations and other serious threats of harm are considered a high
priority for response.
The Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security has certain administrative
and expenditure review and oversight functions under section 29 of the Intelligence Services
Act 2001. Intelligence agencies regularly appear before the Committee and provide reports on
relevant matters.
7
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government, in consultation with its allies
and through international forums, seek to improve its policy framework to deter the practice
of hostage diplomacy and increase transparency and public awareness of the regimes which
engage in hostage diplomacy.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation.
Australia stands resolutely against the practice of arbitrary detention, arrest and sentencing
wherever it may occur, including in Iran. We continue to support global efforts to deter the
practice of arbitrary detention for diplomatic leverage through advocacy in multilateral
forums, including the UN HRC and the Working Group on Arbitrary Detention.
At the 45th Session of the HRC on 1 October 2020, Australia led a joint statement, delivered
by Sweden and supported by 35 countries, on politically motivated arbitrary detention calling
on all states to treat detainees in accordance with international human rights law. Australia
was one of the first countries to endorse the Canada-led Declaration Against Arbitrary
Detention in State-to-State Relations, launched in February 2021. Australia also supports the
associated Partnership Action Plan, which aims to operationalise the Declaration, establishing
voluntary measures states may wish to support and sustain momentum against this practice.
These measures include engaging civil society, academics and think tanks; or supporting
targeted media campaigns to strengthen international awareness to stop arbitrary detention in
state-to-state relations. This initiative is a broader policy response and is not targeted at any
one case or country.
While the Australian Government recognises that there are no perfect systems or easy
solutions, we are committed to refining and improving the ways in which we support
Australians detained overseas.
This year, DFAT established the Complex Case Committee to improve its management of
complex consular cases, including cases potentially subject to arbitrary detention or hostage
diplomacy. The Committee brings together senior decision-makers across government to
apply a strategic lens to ensure we are exploring every avenue to make progress on complex
cases. The Committee will also provide greater scrutiny of arbitrary detention cases and
focuses efforts on their resolution.
DFAT has also established an External Advisory Group this year to better incorporate expert
and stakeholder views into support for detainees and their families in complex consular cases.
The Group will meet twice a year to provide expertise on handling these cases.
DFAT advises Australians travelling overseas of country-specific travel risks on the
Smartraveller website. The travel advice for Iran advises Australians not to travel to Iran and
highlights the increased risk of arbitrary detention or arrest. Advice on the risk of arbitrary
detention is also provided for a number of other countries.
8
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government use the available Magnitsky
legislation to expand the list of individuals and entities subject to sanctions in response to
human rights abuses in Iran, with particular focus on senior officials responsible for violence,
human rights abuses, arbitrary detention and executions without due process.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government imposes and implements Australian autonomous sanctions as a
matter of foreign policy when it is in our national interest.
Since September 2022, the Government has imposed three tranches of thematic human rights
(Magnitsky-style) sanctions on Iranian persons and entities involved in the arrest, detention
and ill-treatment of Mahsa ‘Jina’ Amini, the crackdowns on protesters, and the continued
oppression of the people of Iran [announced 10 December 2022, 1 February 2023 and 20
March 2023].
These sanctions target 36 persons and 17 entities and include some of the most serious
perpetrators of human rights abuses and violations since protests began on 16 September
2022. They include a range of senior Iranian administrative, military, law enforcement and
security figures, including individuals within the IRGC.
Under Australia’s thematic human rights sanctions framework, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs may designate a person or entity if the Minister is satisfied the person or entity has
engaged in, has been responsible for, or has been complicit in an act that constitutes a serious
violation or a serious abuse of a person’s:
• right to life; or
• right not to be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment; or the right not to be held in slavery or servitude; or
• right not to be required to perform forced or compulsory labour.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs is also required to obtain the agreement of the Attorney-
General and consult any other Ministers as appropriate.
On 6 July 2023 the Iran autonomous sanctions framework was amended to include new
criteria which would allow the Minister for Foreign Affairs to sanction persons and entities,
involved in:
• the oppression of women and girls in Iran;
• the general oppression of people in Iran;
• undermining good governance or the rule of law in Iran; and
9
• assisting Iran to threaten or undermine the sovereignty or territorial integrity of
another country.
These changes will ensure that Australia is able to more quickly and effectively respond to
human rights abuses and violations in Iran, as well as Iran’s destabilising activities abroad.
Consistent with longstanding practice, the Government does not speculate publicly on
potential sanctions.
10
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommends the use of sanctions to target Islamic Republic of Iran and
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps-affiliated individuals and entities responsible for
malicious cyber activity against Australia.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government imposes and implements Australian autonomous sanctions as a
matter of foreign policy when it is in our national interest.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs may list a person or entity if they are satisfied the person or
entity has caused, attempted to cause, or assisted with causing, a significant cyber incident or
has otherwise been complicit in causing or attempting to cause a significant cyber incident.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs may also consider whether the conduct of the person or
entity was malicious and in the case of a cyber incident that has occurred, whether the
incident involved action that: destroyed, degraded or rendered unavailable an essential
service or critical infrastructure; resulted in the loss of life or caused serious risk of loss of
life; resulted in theft of intellectual property, trade secrets or confidential business
information for the purposes of gaining a competitive advantage; or interfered with a political
or governmental process, a political right or duty, or the functions or operations of a
parliament.
Australia works on a case-by-case basis to consider all relevant factors in imposing all
sanctions, including cyber sanctions. Consistent with longstanding practice, the Government
does not speculate publicly on potential sanctions.
Australia works closely with like-minded partners to coordinate sanctions where it is in our
national interest to do so.
The Australian Government notes that sanctions are not our only choice, and rarely the first
choice. The Australian Government makes judgements as to what is the right approach at the
right time, in line with our national interests. In September 2022, Australia made a joint
cybersecurity advisory to highlight continued malicious cyber activity by advanced persistent
threat (APT) actors that the authoring agencies assessed were affiliated with the Iranian
Government’s IRGC.
11
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government take the necessary steps to
formally categorise the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps as an organisation involved in
supporting and facilitating terrorism.
Response:
The Government does not accept this recommendation.
The power to specify an organisation as a terrorist organisation under the Criminal Code was
established by the Security Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Act 2002. Under the Criminal
Code, a terrorist organisation is an organisation that:
• has been found by a court, in the course of a prosecution for a terrorism offence, to be
either directly or indirectly engaged in preparing, planning, assisting in or fostering
the doing of a terrorist act; or
• has been listed in Regulations made by the Governor-General.
Under the Criminal Code, the Governor-General may, on advice, make regulations listing a
terrorist organisation.
As noted in its submission to this inquiry on 31 January 2023, the Attorney-General’s
Department is of the view that, as an organ of a nation state, the IRGC is not the kind of
entity that is covered by the terrorist organisation provisions in the Criminal Code.
The Australian Government is focused on taking meaningful steps to put pressure on the
IRGC. On 10 December 2022, 1 February and 20 March 2023, Australia imposed three
packages of thematic human rights (Magnitsky-style) sanctions which include 27 IRGC-
linked individuals and 21 IRGC-linked entities. These sanctions build upon existing sanctions
imposed by Australia on the IRGC, including UN Security Council-mandated sanctions since
2006 and autonomous sanctions since 2008. Under these autonomous sanctions frameworks,
Australia has imposed targeted financial sanctions on the IRGC as a whole since 2010.
12
Recommendation 9
The Committee recommends that Australia should minimise relations with the Islamic
Republic of Iran to the greatest extent possible in recognition of the appalling behaviour of
the regime.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
Australia has maintained a longstanding bilateral relationship with Iran, including an embassy
in Tehran since 1968, because it is in our national interests to do so. It has never been an
endorsement of the Iranian regime. Embassies and diplomatic staff are essential to maintain
official channels of communication between governments.
Our diplomatic presence in Tehran enables us to provide consular services to Australian
citizens and make direct representations to the Iranian Government on issues of concern. This
includes Iran's threats and attacks against our friends and allies in the Middle East, its
destabilising activities in the region and the human rights situation in Iran.
The Australian Government has taken steps to limit Australia’s engagement with Iran where
it is in our interests to do so.
As an example, in April 2023, the Minister for Foreign Affairs wrote to state and territory
governments, Australian public universities and university peak bodies, encouraging these
entities to put on hold any existing cooperation with Iranian entities and to avoid engaging in
any new initiatives. The Minister also asked state and territory governments to relay this
information to local councils within their jurisdiction.
Australia will continue to engage with the Iranian Government when it is in our interests to
do so.
13
Recommendation 10
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government increase transparency and better
inform the Australian public about the status of our diplomatic relations with the Islamic
Republic of Iran regime, as well as our security concerns in relation to the regime’s behaviour
relating to cybercrime, hostage diplomacy and threats to, and intimidation of, Australian
residents.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government has been transparent regarding both the status of our diplomatic relationship
with Iran and our response to the human rights abuses occurring in Iran.
We have been active and consistent in our public condemnation of the Iranian regime’s
egregious human rights violations. This includes public statements from the Prime Minister,
the Hon Anthony Albanese MP, and Minister for Foreign Affairs, Senator the Hon Penny
Wong, as well as at officials level in multilateral forums, and direct representations to Iranian
officials in Iran and the Iranian Chargé d'Affaires in Australia to exert pressure on the regime.
The Prime Minister publicly condemned the crackdown by Iranian authorities, expressing his
abhorrence at the actions of the Iranian Government in Parliament on 9 November 2022. On
26 October 2022, Prime Minister called on Iran to respect the rights of peaceful protesters
and expressing support for Iranian women and girls.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs spoke to her Iranian counterpart in a phone call on 22 March
2023 in which she expressed Australia's condemnation of Iran's brutal crackdown on protests,
execution of protesters and oppression of women and minorities. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs also conveyed Australia’s concerns over foreign interference and made it clear that
we will not tolerate surveillance or harassment of Iranian-Australians.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs has provided regular updates to the Senate on Australia’s
actions in response to Iran’s human rights abuses, including on 10, 21, 22, 28 November
2022, and 7, 16 February, and 8 March 2023.
Furthermore, the Minister for Foreign Affairs has made numerous public comments and
statements, and issued social media messages expressing her concern with the ongoing
situation in Iran and condemning the Iranian regime’s horrific repression of protests,
including its disturbing use of the death penalty.
On 16 December 2022, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, along with her Canadian and New
Zealand counterparts, released a joint-statement condemning Iran’s imposition of the death
penalty and calling on Iran to immediately establish a moratorium to halt all executions. On
20 October 2022, the Minister for Foreign Affairs delivered a video statement to a meeting of
women Foreign Ministers, chaired by Canadian Foreign Minister Joly condemning the
14
authorities’ crackdown and supporting Iranian women and girls. The Minister for Foreign
Affairs also issued a joint statement on 27 September 2022 with the Minister for Women,
Senator the Hon Katy Gallagher, condemning the violent crackdown on protesters.
15
Recommendation 11
The Committee recommends that any Iranian officials in Australia considered to be involved
in intimidation, threats, or monitoring of Australians be expelled.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government is deeply concerned by reports of protesters and their families
being harassed and intimidated. The Minister for Foreign Affairs raised this issue directly
with her Iranian counterpart in a phone conversation on 22 March 2023. DFAT also raised
this issue with the Iranian Chargé d'Affaires on several occasions.
The Department of Home Affairs is working with the community to conduct targeted
engagement on foreign interference. The multi-agency CFI Taskforce leads the operational
response to espionage and foreign interference threat and works to identify, investigate, and
disrupt attempts and acts of foreign interference.
On the 14 February 2023, the Minister for Home Affairs, in a public address on foreign
interference, specifically called out Iran and provided details of an instance of foreign
interference in Australia by the Iranian regime. She reiterated that Australia absolutely will
not tolerate, under any circumstances, attempts by foreign regimes to disrupt peaceful
protests, or try to perpetrate violence or suppress specific views being expressed. The
Minister for Home Affairs also clearly stated that the Australian Government will not tolerate
hostile acts in the form of surveillance, harassment or intimidation against individuals here in
Australia. The Australian Government will continue to defend our democracy and the right of
any person in Australia to protest and express their views lawfully, just as we stand up for the
rights of those to do so elsewhere.
Regarding the expulsion of Iranian officials in Australia, the Government considers
embassies and diplomatic officials to be essential for maintaining official channels of
communication between governments. Our diplomatic relationship allows us to make direct
representations to the Iranian Government on issues of concern, including the human rights
situation in Iran, threats and attacks against our friends and allies in the region and Iran’s
other destabilising activities in the region, including support for armed proxies.
16
Recommendation 12
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government increase the intake of Iranians
under various visa programs, with a particular focus on women, girls and persecuted
minorities seeking to escape the IRI regime. Iranians in Australia on temporary visas who
cannot safely return to Iran due to the current crisis and policies of the IRI should not be
required to do so.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
Australia’s Humanitarian Program operates flexibly to respond effectively to evolving
humanitarian situations and global resettlement needs, and the Department of Home Affairs
will continue to closely monitor the situation in Iran. Any person, including Iranian nationals,
who believe they meet the requirements for a humanitarian visa and wishes to seek
Australia’s assistance, can make an application. Each application is considered on its
individual merit using current and comprehensive information on circumstances in the
relevant country.
Consistent with the approach adopted by the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, Australia prioritises resettlement of vulnerable cohorts within the refugee
population including women and children, ethnic minorities, LGBTQI+ and other identified
minority groups. Iranian nationals have consistently been in the top ten offshore resettlement
caseloads over the last five program years.
Australia is committed to its international obligations set out in the 1951 Convention relating
to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol, and other relevant international treaties to
which Australia is a party. Australia does not return individuals to situations where they face
persecution or a real risk of torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
arbitrary deprivation of life or the application of the death penalty. Iranian nationals who are
in Australia on another temporary visa, such as a student or visitor visa, and are seeking
protection, can apply for a Permanent Protection visa (Subclass 866).
Some temporary visas may have condition 8503 imposed, which prevents visa holders from
applying for most temporary and permanent visas while in Australia. This condition does not
prevent a person from applying for a Protection visa. Additionally, this condition may be
waived where applicants can demonstrate there has been a change in circumstances since the
grant of their initial visa, and the circumstances that have developed are compelling and
compassionate.
On 13 February 2023, the Government announced a permanent visa pathway to existing
Temporary Protection visa (TPV) and Safe Haven Enterprise visa (SHEV) holders. From 14
February 2023, more than 19,000 existing TPV and SHEV holders and applicants who have
previously been found to engage Australia’s protection obligations will be eligible to either
apply for a permanent Subclass 851 Resolution of Status (RoS) visa or will have their
existing on-hand TPV/SHEV application converted to a RoS visa application.
17
The majority of existing TPV and SHEV holders are expected to be granted a RoS visa
within 12 months of processing commencement. Around 32 percent of the TPV/SHEV
caseload are Iranian citizens.
Iranian nationals are able to pursue other migration pathways to enter, or remain, in Australia
depending on their circumstances, such as through the Family stream, and Skilled visa
categories. This includes the Skilled Refugee Labour Agreement Pilot Program. Under this
pilot program, endorsed Australian businesses are able to utilise a Labour Agreement to
sponsor skilled refugees and displaced persons (including those from Iran) to live and work in
Australia. For further information, see the Skilled Refugee Labour Agreement Pilot Program
webpage on the Home Affairs website.
18
