ra

Australian Government

Australian Government response to the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security report:

regime, the preventative detention order regime and the continuing
detention order regime

September 2023

Australian Government response to the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and
Security report: Review of police powers in relation to terrorism, the control order regime, the
preventative detention order regime and the continuing detention order regime

“=== The Government thanks the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security (the
Committee) for its work on these complex and important issues and provides the following
responses to the Committee’s recommendations.

Recommendation 1

The Committee recommends that Division 3A of the Crimes Act 1914 be amended so that:

e the Australian Federal Police must notify the Commonwealth Ombudsman, the Independent
National Security Legislation Monitor and the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence
and Security of any declaration of a ‘prescribed security zone’ as soon as practicable, but no
later than 72 hours after the Minister has made the declaration;

e the Minister of [sic] Home Affairs must ensure that the PJCIS is given a written statement of

——-reasons for-the making-of the declaration of a“prescribed security zone~to enable the —- n=
Committee to perform its function under subparagraph 29(1)(bba)(ii) of the Intelligence
Services Act 2001 to monitor and review the basis of the Minister’s declaration of prescribed
security zones; and

e police officers exercising Division 3A powers to inform a person being stopped and detained

for the purpose of a search of their right to make a complaint to the Commonwealth

Ombudsman or applicable State or Territory police oversight body or bodies, unless this is not

reasonably practicable because of circumstances of urgency.

The Government accepts this recommendation.

The Government acknowledges that receiving prompt notification from the Australian Federal Police
(AFP) after a declaration has been made will enhance the ability of the Commonwealth Ombudsman,
the Independent National Security Legislation Monitor (INSLM), and the Committee to perform
relevant oversight functions.

While the Commonwealth Ombudsman does not hold a specific oversight function once a prescribed
security zone is in place, early notification of a declaration would alert the Commonwealth
Ombudsman to the exercise of powers in the prescribed security zone.

The INSLM has a statutory role in ensuring Australia’s counter-terrorism and national security
legislation is effective, remains proportionate to terrorism or national security threats, remains
necessary and is consistent with Australia’s international obligations. The Committee similarly has a
statutory role in reviewing the operation, effectiveness and implications of the use of Division 3A
powers. Early notification of a declaration would help ensure the INSLM and Committee are
appropriately informed to conduct relevant reviews, which serve an important function in holding
Government to account for maintaining fit for purpose, proportionate counter-terrorism legislation,
and ensuring the proper exercise of powers. Early notification to the Committee would also support
the Committee’s role in monitoring and reviewing the performance of the AFP of its Division 3A
functions and enhance the Committee’s oversight of those functions.

The Government notes that under the Administrative Arrangements Order that commenced on
14 October 2022, the Attorney-General is the Minister responsible for making declarations of
prescribed security zones. The Attorney-General is also the Minister who will be responsible for
providing a written statement of reasons to the Committee when the Crimes Act 1914 (the Crimes
Act) is amended in accordance with this recommendation.

The Government also notes that a person’s right to complain to the Commonwealth Ombudsman or

applicable state or territory police oversight body about the conduct of a police officer exercising

Division 3A powers would not be affected if the police officer did not advise them of this right due to
circumstances of urgency.

Recommendation 2

The Committee recommends that the Crimes Act 1914 be amended to provide a list of particular

matters the Minister must consider before declaring a prescribed security zone, including:

e the identified impacts on third party rights would be reasonable and proportionate to the
purpose of preventing, or responding to, a terrorist act

e =the availability and effectiveness of alternative powers

¢ anappropriate duration of such a declaration (within the maximum 28 day period)

e the impact — and proportionality — of successive declarations

The Government accepts this recommendation.

The Government supports the Committee’s observation that a list of specific factors may provide
guidance to Ministers and agencies that would aid in efficiently preparing and making a declaration
at what would likely be a time of heightened uncertainty.

The Government also supports clarifying in the legislation that if the Minister makes a declaration
for a period shorter than 28 days, the declaration will cease to be in force at the end of that shorter

time period. This would provide more certainty as to the duration of a declaration.

Recommendation 3

The Committee recommends that the stop, search and seizure powers under Subsections 3UK(1),
(2) and (3) of the Crimes Act 1914 be extended to 7 December 2025.

The Government accepts this recommendation.

The stop, search and seizure powers under subsections 3UK(1), (2) and (3) of the Crimes Act are
important measures under Australia’s counter-terrorism response framework. There is an ongoing
need to ensure police can respond and prevent terrorist attacks, and the inclusion of a sunset
mechanism reflects the need to continually review the powers to ensure they are appropriate to
respond to the evolving threat environment.

The Government proposes to extend the sunset date to 7 December 2026 to align with the intent of
the Committee’s recommendation, which was to allow a three-year extension of the powers to

7 December 2025. In 2022 the Parliament agreed to extend the sunset powers for one year to

7 December 2023, to enable sufficient time for the Government to consider the Committee’s
recommendations. Given Parliament’s consideration of the powers last year, the Government
considers it appropriate to extend the sunset period for a further three years.

Recommendation 4

The Committee recommends that the Intelligence Services Act 2001 be amended to provide the
Committee with the option to conduct a further review prior to the sunset date into the
operation, effectiveness and implications of the stop, search and seizure powers in Division 3A of
Part IAA of the Crimes Act 1914.

The Government accepts this recommendation.

This will be implemented through the Intelligence Services Legislation Amendment Bill 2023 which is
currently before Parliament.

Recommendation 5

The Committee recommends that the Attorney-General’s Department consider the |
appropriateness of the implementation of a duty judge system where applications for search
warrants could be received and considered on an expedited basis.

The Government accepts this recommendation.

The Attorney-General’s Department, in consultation with the Australian Federal Police, has
considered the appropriateness of the implementation of a ‘duty judge system’ for search warrants.
Following this consideration, the Commonwealth’s position is that implementation of such as system
by all states and territories could deliver benefits, such as ensuring consistent, ready access across
jurisdictions to those authorised to issue search warrants (being magistrates, or justices of the peace

—-—--____- or-other_persons.employed in.a-court-of-a-state-or-territory).-A clear-framework-for-access to issuing
officers ensures warrants can be issued to meet operational needs as necessary.

The Commonwealth has identified that the Legal Issues Working Group of the Australia-New Zealand
Counter-Terrorism Committee is the appropriate forum to progress this matter with representatives
from state and territory jurisdictions. The Commonwealth will propose that the working group’s
Forward Work Plan be amended to consider options for implementing a duty judge system, noting
the states and territories will need to agree to the Forward Work Plan, and that the progress of this
proposal (including resourcing) is ultimately a matter for each state and territory.

Recommendation 6

The Committee recommends an amendment to section 3UEA of the Crimes Act 1914 requiring any
agency that enters premises in accordance with section 3UE to obtain an ex post facto warrant as
soon as possible following the use of warrantless entry powers.

The Government accepts this recommendation.

A mechanism by which an ex post facto assessment is undertaken of whether or not an officer who
has entered premises in accordance with section 3UEA has done so properly, and in accordance with
the law, would provide assurance that powers have been exercised only in response to extraordinary
circumstances and would enhance oversight of these powers.

However, the complexity and significance of this matter warrants further consideration and
consultation to develop an appropriate legislative response. This includes having regard to the
consequences that should flow from an assessment that the powers were not exercised
appropriately.

Recommendation 7

The Committee recommends that the control order regime as outlined in Division 104 of the
Criminal Code Act 1995 be extended to 7 December 2025.

The Government accepts this recommendation.

The control order regime achieves the legitimate objective of protecting Australia’s national security
interests, including preventing terrorist acts.

The Government proposes to extend the sunset date to 7 December 2026 to align with the intent of
the Committee’s recommendation, which was to allow a three-year extension of the powers to

7 December 2025. In 2022, the Parliament agreed to extend the sunset powers for one year to

7 December 2023, to enable sufficient time for the Government to consider the Committee’s
recommendations: Given Parliamient’s consideration of the powers last year, the Government
considers it appropriate to extend the sunset period for a further three years.

Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends that the definition of ‘issuing court’ in the Criminal Code Act 1995 be
amended to only the Federal Court of Australia.

The Government accepts this recommendation.

Limiting the power to issue control orders to the Federal Court of Australia acknowledges the serious
and extraordinary nature of those orders.

The Government does not propose to cease or invalidate any decisions and orders made by the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia before the Criminal Code Act 1995 (Criminal Code) is

amended in accordance with this recommendation.

Recommendation 9

The Committee recommends that section 29 of the Intelligence Services Act 2001 be amended to
provide that the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security may commence a
review of Division 104 of the Criminal Code Act 1995 prior to the sunset of the provisions.

The Government accepts this recommendation.

This will be implemented through the Intelligence Services Legislation Amendment Bill 2023 which is
currently before Parliament.

Recommendation 10

The Committee recommends that section 104.5(3) of the Criminal Code Act 1995 be amended to
align the conditions that can be imposed as part of the control orders regime with proposed
Schedule 1, clause 105.7A of the Counter-Terrorism Legislation Amendment (High Risk Terrorist
Offenders) Bill 2020.

The Government accepts this recommendation.

Aligning control order and extended supervision order conditions would enable a court to impose
any condition that is reasonably necessary and reasonably appropriate and adapted for the purpose
of protecting the public from a terrorist act or preventing a terrorist act. This would include, but
would not be limited to, a range of therapeutic conditions for example, requiring the offender to
attend treatment, rehabilitation or intervention programs or activities or participate in case
management. This would provide the court with the greatest discretion to tailor control order
conditions to mitigate the specific risk posed by an individual and their circumstances, rather than be
limited to a confined list of possible controls.

The implementation of this recommendation has been informed by the review conducted in
response to recommendation 11.

Recommendation 11 oe
The Committee recommends the Australian Government undertake a review of the range of

conditions that could be imposed as part of a control order, and report back to the Parliamentary
Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security by July 2022.

The Government accepts this recommendation.

The Attorney-General’s Department has conducted this review having regard to the need to ensure
that control orders conditions are suitably tailored to protect the community from the risk of
terrorism posed by a particular individual, and only infringe that individual’s rights and freedoms to
the extent that is necessary and proportionate for that purpose. The review found that the proposed
alignment of conditions would be fit for purpose and appropriate.

Recommendation 12
The Committee recommends that Division 104 of the Criminal Code Act 1995 be amended to
——~--—-— provide that the Australian Federal Police: may add conditions with the consent-of both parties;-——
provided that:
e the consent of the subject of the order is fully informed and he or she has been given every
reasonable opportunity to consult with a legal representative; and
‘e ‘consent may be withdrawn by either party at any time.

The Government accepts this recommendation.

The Government supports inserting a new provision into Division 104 that would allow the AFP or
the controlee to apply to a court to vary a control order or interim control order, including to add
new conditions to the order, and allow the court to make the variation if satisfied that:

e written consent to the variation has been given by both parties, and

e the variation is appropriate in the circumstances.

The Government supports allowing either party to withdraw consent to the variation at any time
before the issuing court determine the variation application.

The Government considers it appropriate that variations by consent should be available to all
controlees. However, the Government proposes to include a requirement that, where the controlee
is under 18 years of age, the court must consider the best interests of the controlee in determining
whether each new or varied control order condition is appropriate, and that the controlee’s views
must be taken into account for the purposes of determining what is in their best interests. The
Government also proposes to require that consent be provided on the controlee’s behalf by a parent
or guardian in these circumstances.

Recommendation 13

The Committee recommends that the Attorney-General’s Department:

e investigate the cost of providing legal aid for those subject to proceedings under Division 104
of the Criminal Code Act 1995, including continuing detention orders and control orders, on
the basis that people subject to the most rights-restrictive powers should receive assistance to
ensure adequate representation provided the costs to the Commonwealth are reasonable; and

¢ provide a report to the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security within the
12 months of the tabling of this report.

The Government accepts this recommendation.

The Government provides specific legal aid funding to state and territory legal aid commissions,

predominantly through the Expensive Commonwealth Criminal Cases Fund, for costs incurred in

defending clients in Commonwealth post-sentence matters, including control orders issued under

Division 104 of the Criminal Code, and continuing detention orders and extended supervision orders
~ issued under Division 105A of the Criminal Code.

The Attorney-General’s Department will provide a report on the relevant legal aid costs under the
Expensive Commonwealth Criminal Cases Fund. This will be provided to the Parliamentary Joint

Committee on Intelligence and Security as soon as practicable.

Recommendation 14

The Committee recommends that the preventative detention order regime in Division 105 of the
Criminal Code Act 1995 be continued for a period of three years and sunset on 7 December 2025.

The Government accepts this recommendation.

Preventative detention orders remain an important part of Australia’s counter-terrorism framework.
in extraordinary circumstances, preventative detention orders may continue to be a proportionate
and necessary measure that enable police to keep the community safe by disrupting and responding
to terrorist activities at an early stage.

The Government proposes to extend the sunset date to 7 December 2026 to align with the intent of
the Committee’s recommendation, which was to allow a three-year extension of the powers to

7 December 2025. In 2022 the Parliament agreed to extend the sunset powers for one year to

7 December 2023, to enable sufficient time for the Government to consider the Committee’s
recommendations. Given Parliament’s consideration of the powers last year, the Government
considers it appropriate to extend the sunset period for a further three years.

Recommendation 15

The Committee recommends that Division 105 of the Criminal Code Act 1995 be amended to

remove:

e amember of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (other than the AAT President or a Deputy
President who also holds a commission as a Federal Court Judge); and

e aJudge of the Federal Circuit Court.

The Government accepts this recommendation.

The effect of implementing this recommendation would be that only persons who hold a
commission as Judge of a state or territory Supreme Court, or as a Judge of the Federal Court of
Australia could be appointed as an issuing authority for preventative detention orders.

Limiting the power to issue preventative detention orders to judges of superior courts reflects the
serious and extraordinary nature of those orders, and the significant volume and complexity of
evidence that must be considered in making these decisions.

For a person who held an appointment as an issuing authority immediately before the Criminal Code
is amended in accordance with this recommendation, and who will no longer be eligible to be an
issuing authority after the amendments commence, the Government considers that their
appointment should lapse immediately after the amendments commence. The amendments should
not affect the continuity of any order or decision made prior to commencement by a person’s whose
appointment as an issuing authority lapses upon commencement.

Recommendation 16

The Committee recommends that section 29 of the Intelligence Service Act 2001 be amended to
provide that the Committee may commence a review the provisions of Division 105 of the Criminal
“Code Act 1995 prior to the sunset of the provisions. 7

The Government accepts this recommendation.

This will be implemented through the Intelligence Services Legislation Amendment Bill 2023 which is
currently before Parliament.

Recommendation 17

The Committee recommends that section 29 of the Intelligence Services Act 2001 be amended to
provide that the Committee may conduct a further review into the operation, effectiveness and

implications of the continuing detention order regime in Division 105A of the Criminal Code Act

——-—-———----- J 995 prior to the sunset date-—-—-_—_—-----—----- ens en a
The Government accepts this recommendation.

“This will be implemented through the Intelligence Services Legislation Amendment Bill 2023 which is
currently before Parliament.

Recommendation 18

The Committee recommends that the Department of Home Affairs coordinates with relevant State
and Territory Departments to source appropriate accommodations to facilitate interim and
confirmed continuing detention orders. The Committee recommends coordination with New
South Wales on appropriate accommodation should start as soon as possible, noting the number
of eligible offenders due to be released in the next five years.

The Government accepts this recommendation.

The Government supports the ongoing coordination between the Department of Home Affairs and
relevant state and territory departments to locate appropriate accommodation to facilitate terrorist
offenders subject to interim and confirmed continuing detention orders.

Recommendation 19

The Committee recommends that the Criminal Code Act 1995 be amended to require public

reporting requirements on the use and implementation of Division 105A, including:

e details of housing arrangements for individuals subject to a continuing detention order;

e use of rehabilitation programs (pre and post-release); and

e use of resources; including rehabilitation program costs, legal assistance costs, and costs
associated with enforcement.

The Government accepts this recommendation.

Expanding the public reporting requirements in relation to Division 105A would improve
transparency in relation to the operation and resourcing of the post-sentence order scheme, and the
management of terrorist offenders subject to a post-sentence order. The topics identified in this
recommendation are critical to a holistic understanding of the operation of the scheme, which
annual reporting aims to support.
