Australian Government response to the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Law Enforcement
Inquiry report:
Public communications campaigns targeting drug and
substance abuse
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the Final Report of the Parliamentary Joint Committee
on Law Enforcement Inquiry on Public communications campaigns targeting drug and
substance abuse.
The Government would like to thank all those who were involved in the Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Law Enforcement (the committee) and those who made written submissions
and gave evidence at the public hearings.
The Government acknowledges that illicit drugs continue to have a significant impact on
individuals, families and communities across Australia and is committed to preventing the
uptake and reducing the harms associated with use. Illicit drugs are also a cause for concern
given the involvement of serious and organised crime syndicates producing and trafficking
them.
The Government also acknowledges the ongoing need for targeted public communications
campaigns in reducing the demand for illicit drugs and encouraging behavioural change.
Drug use is often influenced by an individual’s beliefs and attitudes and the socio-cultural
environment within which they find themselves. By increasing awareness of the harms of
drug use and encouraging behaviour change, campaigns may reduce people’s motivations
towards drug use.
The Government undertakes a range of reduction and prevention activities focusing on harm
minimisation of drug use in Australia, through the overarching framework of the National
Drug Strategy 2017-2026 (the Strategy). The Strategy includes ‘targeted communication
strategies’ as a method to achieve its overall aim of preventing and minimising drug-related
harms, consistent with the priority action of ‘preventing uptake, delaying first use and
reducing use.’
The committee’s Final Report made four recommendations addressing a range of areas across
communications, including the efficacy of different approaches to drug-related campaigns,
best practice approaches to designing and implementing campaigns and other related matters.
The Government notes the recommendations of the Final Report. This response specifically
addresses the recommendations identified in the Final Report. It has been coordinated and
prepared by the Department of Health and Aged Care, with input from the Attorney-
General’s Department and the Department of Home Affairs.
2
Australian Government Response to Final Report
Recommendation 1
2.90 The committee recommends that the Australian Government implement a new public
communications campaign via the National Drugs Campaign that will support law
enforcement agencies’ efforts to reduce current and future illicit drug demand. The campaign
should include the targeted use of social media.
Response:
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
The Australian Government has a strong history of campaigning against the use of illicit
drugs, beginning in 1985 with the ‘National Campaign Against Drug Abuse’ followed by a
series of targeted campaigns in the 1990s under the branding ‘The Drug Offensive’. There are
clear benefits and economies in developing and implementing these initiatives at the national
level, maximising opportunities afforded by the cost-efficiencies and agenda-setting and a
consistent approach with national media and stakeholders.
To date, the National Drugs Campaign (NDC) has been based on a harm minimisation
approach and plays an important role as an awareness-raising and prevention initiative. There
have been many phases of campaign activity addressing different audiences and specific
drugs to respond to current and emerging drugs.
Any campaign developed to reduce current and future illicit drug use and demand would
likely include the targeted use of social media. This channel was particularly effective in
reaching crystal methamphetamine (ice) users during the most recent phase of the NDC under
the National Ice Action Strategy.
In line with Australian Government advertising requirements and best practice, final media
placement decisions are based on formative research recommendations and expert advice
from the master media buying agency, currently Universal McCann.
Recommendation 2
3.75 The committee recommends future Australian Government communications campaigns
include the following characteristics:
• contain targeted messages on the dangers of illicit drug use to key cohorts
• reflect the lived experiences of illicit drug users and also the experiences of trusted
people, such as teachers and healthcare workers, to establish behavioural change
• provide information on addiction treatment off-ramps
• include a national schools’ element that will take a multi-component approach to
developing protective factors and involve the national education community in its
design and implementation
3
• be based on appropriately detailed and considered research and, prior to
commencement, have in place both quantitative and qualitative measures for efficacy
• take a long-term approach of at least 3–5 years and include a sustained approach to
key cohorts over that entire period.
Response:
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in principle, noting that specific
components will be dependent on formative research recommendations and requirements
under the Guidelines on Information and Advertising Campaigns by non-corporate
Commonwealth entities (the Guidelines).
All Australian Government campaigns are informed by market research that identifies the
need for the campaign, the relevant target audiences and the kinds of messaging and channels
that would be most appropriate. This typically involves both quantitative and qualitative
methodologies.
In accordance with the Guidelines, creative materials undergo concept testing with the target
audiences to ensure they are appropriate and likely to meet the campaign’s objectives.
Campaigns need to ensure they do not unintentionally further marginalise or stigmatise
people who are at higher risk of experiencing alcohol, tobacco and other drug related harm.
Under the whole-of-government arrangement for evaluation research, benchmarking is
conducted prior to campaign launch, with ongoing tracking research while in market. This
assesses the effectiveness of the campaign by monitoring changes in the target audiences’
attitudes, knowledge and intended/reported behaviour in relation to the key campaign
messages.
Recommendation 3
4.18 The committee recommends the Australian Government establish a formal mechanism to
ensure that Commonwealth, State and Territory law enforcement bodies have a strong equal
voice in developing policies and strategies to reduce illicit drug demand, including drug
treatment services.
Response:
The Australian Government supports this recommendation, noting the importance of cross-
agency and cross-jurisdictional collaboration and coordination and the need for a balanced
approach between health and law enforcement.
The Australian Government’s approach to preventing and reducing harms associated with
drug use is set out in the overarching framework of the National Drug Strategy 2017-2026.
The Strategy guides action by health and law enforcement agencies at both the
Commonwealth and state and territory government level, in partnership with service
providers and the community. The Strategy outlines the Government’s commitment to
4
supporting the principle of harm minimisation, through the three pillars of supply, demand
and harm reduction and a balanced approach between health and law enforcement.
Cooperation between law and enforcement, policing, justice and health sectors is essential in
delivering effective responses under these three pillars.
Recommendation 4
4.19 The committee recommends the Australian Government support research, potentially by
the Australian Institute of Criminology, into the efficacy of addiction treatment programs in
reducing drug-related crime recidivism.
Response:
The Australian Government supports this recommendation. The Australian Institute of
Criminology will undertake a cost-benefit analysis of addiction treatment programs to
ascertain their efficacy in reducing drug related criminal activity within an Australian
context.
5
