Australian Government response to the
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References
Committee report:
Practice of dowry and the incidence of dowry abuse in
Australia
OCTOBER 2023
Introduction
The Australian Government is grateful to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs
References Committee for their inquiry into the practice of dowry and the incidence of dowry
abuse in Australia. The Government is committed to acting to prevent family and domestic
violence and abuse, and to improve the legal protections and assistance available to those
affected by violence and abuse in the family law, criminal justice, and immigration systems.
The Government thanks the committee for identifying several areas where improvements to
the family law, criminal justice and immigration systems would help to ensure that people
experiencing dowry abuse are supported and protected, and perpetrators held accountable.
The report identifies 12 recommendations to address these key issues.
The Government has carefully considered these recommendations and agrees to five
recommendations, agrees to two recommendations in part, and agrees to five
recommendations in principle.
The Government’s response to the committee’s report reflects the importance of a
coordinated and considered approach to meeting the complex needs of families experiencing
violence, including dowry abuse. The response also addresses ways in which existing
Government initiatives and work agendas could be enhanced by considering and
incorporating the committee’s recommendations.
The Government notes that some of the committee’s recommendations have been considered
alongside the Government’s ongoing response to the Australian Law Reform Commission’s
(ALRC) recommendations in the Family Law for the Future—An Inquiry into the Family
Law System Final Report (ALRC Report 135). The committee’s report will also be considered
by the Government in progressing its ongoing response to the recommendations of earlier
inquiries.
The Government response is complemented with its $589.3 million investment as part of the
2023-24 Budget in measures to drive change under the National Plan to End Violence against
Women and Children 2022-2032 (National Plan) which provides a renewed national
approach to addressing and preventing family, domestic and sexual violence, with an
enhanced focus on the intersectional impacts of violence and diverse lived experiences of
victim-survivors. This builds on the Government’s record investment of $1.7 billion in the
2022-23 Budget in measures supporting the National Plan.
# Recommendation Government Response
1 The committee recommends that the term 'economic abuse' is included Agreed in principle
as a form of family violence in subsection 4AB(2) of the Family Law The Government has committed to progressing a
Act 1975, and the subsection provide a non-exhaustive list of examples national definition of family and domestic violence that
of economic abuse, including dowry abuse. includes coercive control. Consideration of a national
definition would likely include consideration of whether
dowry abuse should be included. Consideration of a
national definition would likely include consideration of
the definition in section 4AB of the Family Law Act
1975 (FLA) and if developed, influence future
amendments to this definition.
The Government notes that the definition of family
violence in section 4AB of the FLA is broad and
currently covers family violence that may be related to
economic and financial abuse, including dowry abuse.
The National Domestic and Family Violence Bench
Book which is co-funded by the Commonwealth, and the
States and Territories includes dowry related abuse as an
example of economic abuse and as an example of
cultural and spiritual abuse in the chapter ‘Understanding
domestic and family violence’.
2 The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with Agreed in principle
the States and Territories to harmonise existing legislation providing for The Government agrees to this recommendation in
intervention/violence orders to explicitly recognise dowry abuse as an principle. In the 2022-23 Budget, the former government
example of family violence or economic abuse. provided funding of $0.8 million over four years to
conduct a review of Domestic and Family Violence
Order frameworks, including:
• penalties for breaches
• relevant definitions, and
• the scope of the National Domestic Violence
Order Scheme (NDVOS)
3 The committee recommends that the Australian Government give further Agreed
consideration to legal and decision making frameworks to ensure that This recommendation is being considered alongside
victims of dowry abuse are not disadvantaged in family law property Recommendation 23 of the Joint Select Committee on
settlements, given the community concerns about inconsistent Australia’s Family Law System Second Interim Report
approaches under the current family law framework. and recommendations of ALRC Report 135 that
proposed legislative amendments to improve and
strengthen the family law system in relation to family
law property settlements.
4 The committee recommends that the Australian Government: Agreed in principle
• give further consideration to the recommendation of the Victorian The Government agrees to this recommendation in
Royal Commission into Family Violence to broaden the definition of principle. The definition of family violence in the
family violence in the Migration Regulations 1994; and Migration Regulations 1994 (the Migration Regulations)
• ensure that those who are forced to marry their partner or experience is broad and takes into consideration other federal
family violence from their partner and/or their partner’s family legislation, including the FLA, as well as the laws of
members are protected through the family violence provisions in the States and Territories. It includes conduct towards an
Migration Regulations 1994, such that the regulatory framework is alleged victim, a member of their or the perpetrator’s
consistent with the policy intention to protect victims of domestic or family, or towards property, actual or threatened, that
family violence within the migration context. causes the alleged victim to reasonably fear for, or to be
reasonably apprehensive about, his or her own wellbeing
or safety. This definition includes non-physical forms of
abuse such as psychological and financial abuse, and
would capture a range of dowry-related abuse.
The Family Violence Provisions in migration legislation
allow certain visa applicants to be granted a permanent
visa if their relationship has broken down and they have
suffered domestic and family violence perpetrated by the
sponsoring partner or primary applicant. In 2022, the
Department of Home Affairs’ Procedural Instructions
were updated to clarify that when determining whether
an act of family violence has been committed by the
applicant's sponsoring partner, consideration should be
given not only to conduct directly committed by the
sponsoring partner, but also whether the sponsoring
partner has engaged in any act (or omission) which could
reasonably be regarded as relevant family
violence perpetrated by the sponsoring partner (via a
third party).
The Government has reaffirmed its commitment to
combat forced marriage in the National Action Plan to
Combat Modern Slavery 2020-2025. Under this National
Action Plan the Government will implement a range of
initiatives that will strengthen responses to forced
marriage, guided by five National Strategic Priorities:
prevent; disrupt, investigate and prosecute; support and
protect; partner; and research. This includes a
commitment to develop a model for enhanced civil
protection and remedies for individuals in or at risk of
forced marriage. The Government has also committed to
undertake a targeted review of Australia’s visa
framework, including to identify and reduce
vulnerabilities to modern slavery. The Government also
provides support for non-citizen victims of human
trafficking, slavery and slavery-like practices, under the
Human Trafficking Visa Framework (HTVF).
5 The committee recommends that the Australian Government act to Agreed in part
address the injustice whereby family violence protection is not available The Government agrees to this recommendation. It has
to victims on many temporary visas and consider: allocated $10 million in the 2023-24 Budget to expand
• extending the family violence provisions in the Migration the family violence provisions in the Migration
Regulations 1994 beyond temporary Partner visa holders, Regulations to more visa subclasses and extend the
Prospective Marriage visa holders who have married their sponsor funding for the Department of Home Affairs’ specialised
and dependent applicants for a Distinguished Talent visa, to apply to visa support service for temporary visa holders
other family visa subclasses; and experiencing domestic and family violence. The family
• the creation of a temporary visa—for example a 'Woman at Risk in violence provisions will be expanded to secondary
Australia' visa—to be available for non-family temporary visa applicants for most permanent visa subclasses in addition
holders who have suffered serious and proven family violence to the inclusion of additional cohorts of prospective
including dowry abuse. marriage visa holders and partner visa applicants.
Where the Family Violence Provisions do not apply, for
example if a temporary visa holder does not have an
application for a permanent visa, the Department’s
policy is not to cancel a person’s temporary visa solely
because their relationship with the primary applicant
broke down due to family and domestic violence, noting
that a visa can be cancelled on other grounds.
The specialised visa support service within the
Department of Home Affairs provides a centralised point
of contact for domestic and family violence victim
support services. It also assists temporary visa holders
who are family and domestic violence victim-survivors
to regularise their visa status under the migration law
framework, including through provision of tailored case
management support.
The Department of Home Affairs is continuing to
consider other measures to further improve the supports
available to temporary visa holders who experience
family and domestic violence, including the option of
creating a new visa.
6 The committee recommends that the Australian Government ensure Agreed in principle
decision makers consider the nature of alleged family violence when The Government agrees to this recommendation in
making an assessment on whether the relationship was genuine prior to principle. Decision makers in the Department of Home
it ending. Affairs are aware of the requirement to consider all
aspects of the relationship and determine whether the
claimed family violence may prevent an applicant from
providing adequate evidence of the genuineness of the
relationship. Additional resources are being prepared to
provide further guidance to decision makers assessing
the genuineness of a relationship in the context of family
violence.
7 The committee recommends that the Australian Government consider Agreed in part
innovative use of the sponsorship mechanism and the new family The Government agrees to this recommendation in part.
sponsorship framework to prevent previous perpetrators from The current Migration Regulations 1994 provide:
sponsoring multiple spouses, and by requiring sponsors to provide • Limitations on repeat sponsorships for Partner
disclosures and give undertakings in relation to their circumstances and and Prospective Marriage visas, whether family
to dowry. violence has occurred or not
• The ability for the Department to disclose a
The committee also recommends that the Australian Government look sponsoring partner’s convictions for certain
explicitly at ensuring that the work of the Department of Home Affairs offences, including family violence related
is included in National Family Violence Prevention Strategies, not just offences, to the visa applicant
from the point of view of access to visas, but also visa processing and • The ability for the Department to refuse a
assessment. sponsorship application if the sponsor has a
significant criminal record for certain offences,
including family violence related offences.
The family sponsorship framework, set out in the
Migration Amendment (Family Violence and Other
Measures) Act 2018 was applied to the Sponsored Parent
(Temporary) visa in April 2019. In 2021, the Department
of Home Affairs held public consultations on applying
the new family sponsorship framework to Partner visas.
During this process, many stakeholders raised concerns
that the application of some aspects of the framework to
the Partner program could increase the vulnerability of
victim-survivors of family and domestic violence. The
Government continues to review the appropriateness of
existing visa settings and consider measures to further
support domestic and family violence victim-survivors.
The Government agrees that the Department of Home
Affairs should be included in National Family Violence
Prevention Strategies. The Department of Home Affairs
has actively engaged with the development of the
National Plan. Measures brought forward as part of the
First Action Plan to implement the National Plan include
the decisions to expand the family violence provisions
and extend funding for the Department of Home Affairs’
specialised visa support service for temporary visa
holders experiencing family and domestic violence.
8 The committee recommends that the Australian Government, together Agreed
with State and Territory governments, work with culturally and The Government agrees to this recommendation. The
linguistically diverse communities and service providers in order to Government will engage with the States and Territories
determine ways in which to establish a firm evidence base on the as per Recommendation 9, to investigate opportunities
incidence of dowry abuse. for further methods of data collection and research. The
Government has prioritised the importance of
strengthening the evidence base through better data,
reporting and evaluation, as well as the lived experiences
of diverse groups, to improve our understanding of how
to address and prevent family and domestic violence,
through the release of the National Plan.
9 The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with Agreed
the States and Territories to improve and strengthen the governance of The Government agrees to this recommendation. As
data collection practices and standards by implementing a system to noted in Recommendation 8, the Government will
capture and measure the extent and incidence of all forms of family engage with State and Territory Governments to explore
violence in Australia, including dowry abuse as a form of economic further methods of data collection and research to
abuse. strengthen our understanding of family, domestic and
sexual violence as part of the National Plan’s
implementation.
10 The committee recommends the Department of Social Services Family Agreed in principle
Safety Pack is provided individually to all visa applicants in their first The Government agrees to this recommendation in
language, such as during the health examination required as a condition principle. The Family Safety Pack has been developed
of their visa application. for both men and women coming to Australia and
includes information on Australia’s laws regarding
family and domestic violence, sexual assault and forced
marriage, and a women’s right to be safe. The fact sheets
in the Family Safety Pack have been translated into 46
languages and were last updated on 20 February 2019.
The Government provides access to the Family Safety
Pack and other family violence resources through several
mechanisms, including on the Department of Home
Affairs’ website and in visa grant letters.
11 The committee recommends that the Australian, State and Territory Agreed
governments engage with stakeholders in order to develop ongoing The Government agrees to this recommendation. The
education and awareness raising campaigns about family violence, National Plan:
including dowry abuse, in conjunction with the development of further • has a focus on raising awareness and training for
training of frontline professionals including social workers, police, frontline workers,
doctors, judges and decision makers in the Department of Home Affairs. • includes an objective to ensure frontline services
provided by States and Territories are
coordinated, integrated and appropriately
resourced, and
• includes actions to encourage awareness raising
activities and campaigns.
The National Plan is also supported by funding in the
2022-23 Budget relevant to Recommendation 11
including:
• $39.7 million for Lifeline Australia to continue
developing DV alert accredited training.
• Up to $12.6 million in education and training on
family, domestic and sexual violence for
community frontline workers, health
professionals and the justice sector.
• 500 frontline service and community workers to
support women and children experiencing family,
domestic and sexual violence, including with
targeted support to the culturally and
linguistically diverse community.
• $48.7 million to expand the Family and Domestic
Violence Primary Health Network Pilot.
The Government also provides education about family
violence and dowry abuse to humanitarian entrants
settling in Australia through the Australian Cultural
Orientation (AUSCO) program and the Humanitarian
Settlement Program (HSP).
Other initiatives supported by Government include:
• additional phases of the Stop it at the Start
campaign,
• a campaign to promote the importance of
consensual and respectful relationships, and
• continuation of the Social Policy Group
(previously Migration Council) grant to develop
a national framework for the prevention of dowry
abuse.
The Government is also reviewing divisions 270 and 271
of the Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth) which criminalise
forced marriage.
12 The committee recommends that the Australian Government include Agreed
dowry abuse as a possible indicator of exploitation for the purposes of To ensure ongoing investigative skills and capacity are
divisions 270 and 271 of the Criminal Code Act 1995 and ensure that maintained in the investigation of human trafficking,
this is included in any training programs. slavery and slavery-like practices (such as forced
marriage), the Australian Federal Police (AFP) conducts
regular specialised training called the Human Trafficking
Investigations Course. Dowry abuse is included in the
AFP’s list of indicators of human trafficking, slavery and
slavery-like practices, which is used during the Human
Trafficking Investigations Course and is publicly
available on the AFP’s website. The AFP will continue
to ensure that dowry abuse is identified as an indicator as
part of the course.
