Australian Government response to the
Senate Community Affairs Legislation Committee report:
Aged Care and Other Legislation Amendment (Royal
Commission Response No. 2) Bill 2021
DECEMBER 2023
Background
The Aged Care and Other Legislation Amendment (Royal Commission Response No. 2) Bill
2021 (2021 Bill) was introduced into the House of Representatives on 1 September 2021.
On 31 March 2022, the 2021 Bill was returned to the lower house from the Senate with
Parliamentary Amendments, however the Bill was not scheduled for consideration before
the proroguing of the 46th Parliament. As a result, the 2021 Bill lapsed prior to securing
agreement in the same form by both houses of Parliament.
At the time the 2021 Bill was introduced, and the Senate Community Affairs Legislation
Committee handed down their report (including the below recommendations), the current
Labor Government was in opposition. Since being elected, the Government introduced the
Aged Care and Other Legislation Amendment (Royal Commission Response) Act 2022 (RCR
Act).
Recommendation 2 - 1.10 Labor Senators urgently call on the Government to address
issues surrounding workforce recruitment and retention both in this Bill and more
generally.
Th e Government’s response to Recommendation 2 is:
Supports the recommendation.
The Government is aware that there are skill shortages in the aged care sector, and much
needs to be done to ensure the new requirements under the RCR Act, as well as the
subsequently passed Aged Care Amendment (Implementing Care Reform) Act 2022, can be
met by providers.
Since the Government was elected in early May 2022, a number of key steps have been
taken to build, train and support the aged care workforce. This includes a series of skills and
training initiatives for the aged care workforce, including Fee Free TAFE to support training
new and existing aged care workers, and 20,000 new university places to prioritise
opportunities for under-represented groups, focusing on areas of national priority or skills
needs, such as nursing.
The Government also made a number of submissions to the Fair Work Commission (FWC) in
support of increased wages for aged care workers and has committed to funding the
resulting increase in wages.
On 4 November 2022, the FWC made a decision for an interim increase to minimum wages
of 15 per cent for aged care workers in direct care roles on the Aged Care Award, the Social,
Community, Home Care and Disability Services Award and the Nurses Award.
On 21 February 2023, the FWC made a decision that the interim increase to minimum wages
of 15 percent would also apply to Head Chefs/Cooks under the Aged Care Award, and
Recreational Activities Officers/Lifestyle Officers under the Aged Care Awards. The FWC
further decided that the interim increases would take effect from 30 June 2023.
The Government has invested $11.3 billion from 1 July 2023 to fund the FWC’s decision for
an interim increase for direct care workers in the aged care sector.
Other workforce initiatives currently underway include:
• The Workforce Advisory Service - a free, independent and confidential service with
places available to support residential and home care service providers with best
practice advice on attracting, retaining and skilling their workforce.
• The Home Care Workforce Support Program to attract and train 13,000 new aged care
workers for the home care sector.
• The Aged Care Transition to Practice Program to support around 1,400 new aged care
nurses with training and professional development.
• The Clinical Placements Program to provide 5,250 nursing students with the opportunity
to undertake high-quality clinical placements in the care and support sector.
• The Rural Locum Assistance Program, which supports providers with recruitment
challenges.
Local guidance on aged care workforce support are provided through the Department’s
Regional Stewardship Network.
• This Network can actively support providers to navigate access to both Commonwealth
and state programs.
• The Network can also link providers with Local Employment Facilitators and Boosting the
Local Care Workforce Regional Coordinators (funded by Government).
