Australian Government response to the
Senate Economics Legislation Committee report:
Competition and Consumer (Gas Market Code)
Regulations 2023
February 2024
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the Senate Economics Legislation Committee (the
Committee) Report from the Inquiry into Competition and Consumer (Gas Market Code)
Regulations 2023 (the Regulations).
The Committee tabled its report on Friday 6 October 2023, making one recommendation.
The Government supports the committee’s recommendation.
The Coalition Senators’ Dissenting Report makes two recommendations, which the
Australian Government supports one in principle and notes the other.
The Government’s response to the Committee’s report reflects its commitment to engage
constructively on reforms to the wholesale gas market that will ensure a reliable and
affordable supply of gas for Australian customers in the domestic market. The Government
is committed to ensuring a reliable energy system, while honouring the long-term contracts
key international trading partners have made for Australian gas.
Response
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Regulations stand as promulgated.
Response
The Government supports this recommendation.
The Government’s Gas Market Code for the wholesale gas market commenced on 11 July
2023 with a two-month transitional period. It covers negotiations and agreements for the
supply of regulated gas between covered suppliers and buyers in the east coast gas market.
The Gas Market Code was established to help shield east coast gas consumers from volatile
gas prices and minimise the risk of supply shortfalls forecast by the Australian Energy
Market Operator (AEMO) and the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
(ACCC).
Compliance with the Gas Market Code is achieved through the ACCC’s regulatory and
enforcement powers.
Coalition Senators' Dissenting Report
Recommendation 1
That the Australian Government urgently implement policy reforms that increase gas
supply to avert the looming supply cliff.
Response
The Government supports in principle this recommendation.
On 27 November 2023, under the Gas Market Code, the Government announced two new
enforceable commitments totalling up to 300 PJ of gas supply to 2030 to the east coast
domestic gas market, with additional commitments being finalised. These commitments
represent a significant contribution to reducing the risk of shortfalls forecast by AEMO and
the ACCC.
Gas supply and demand in the medium-term is also a focus for the Future Gas Strategy.
Through its development, the Government is working with domestic producers, international
trading partners, industry and consumers to promote Australia’s energy security and
affordability; support decarbonisation, including meeting national climate targets; and
maintain Australia’s trade relationships as a trusted supplier of Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG).
Recommendation 2
That the Australian Government redirects its approach to the gas industry, focussing on
policies to increase production and industry confidence to secure supply and ease prices,
instead of market interference that undermines investment certainty.
Response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The implementation of the Gas Market Code is providing industry with certainty to support
investment and production decisions. The Government has secured four new enforceable
commitments totalling up to 564 PJ of gas supply to 2033 to the east coast domestic gas
market, with additional commitments being finalised.
The Gas Market Code’s price anchor of $12 per GJ seeks to ensure Australian domestic gas
prices are driven by Australian market fundamentals. Gas retailers tend to contract for their
gas supply one to two years in advance of selling it. The benefits from the Gas Market Code
are expected to flow through to downstream markets, including industrial and retail electricity
and gas users and improve the competitiveness of retail prices.
The Gas Market Code’s review mechanism allows for the Energy Minister and the
Resources Minister to jointly initiate a review of the Code’s operation to ensure it remains fit
for purpose, with the first review to commence no later than 1 July 2025.
