Australian Government response to the
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee report:
Family Law Amendment (Information Sharing) Bill 2023 [Provisions]
OCTOBER 2023
On 29 March 2023, the Government introduced the Family Law Amendment (Information Sharing)
Bill 2023 (the Bill) into the House of Representatives. The Bill passed both Houses of Parliament on
19 October 2023.
The Bill would amend the Family Law Act 1975 (Cth) (the Act) to enhance the ability of the Federal
Circuit and Family Court of Australia, and the Family Court of Western Australia (the federal family
law courts), to obtain family violence, child abuse and neglect risk information from State and
Territory police, child protection and firearms agencies. In amending the Act, the Bill gives effect to
key aspects of the National Strategic Framework for Information Sharing between the Family Law
and Family Violence and Child Protection Systems (National Framework).
On 11 May 2023, the Bill was referred to the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation
Committee (the Committee) for inquiry. The Committee tabled their report into the Bill on 14 June
2023. The Committee made two substantive recommendations, and recommended that subject to these,
the Senate pass the Bill.
The Government would like to thank the Committee for its examination of the Bill. The Government
has accepted each of the substantive recommendations from the Committee and remains committed to
enhancing information sharing between the federal family law system, and State and Territory child
protection and family violence systems.
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the Attorney-General’s Department commits to developing
regulations in support of proposed Subdivision DA of Division 8 of Part VII of the Family Law Act
1975 in consultation with relevant stakeholders.
Agreed
The Government is committed to ensuring the legislative provisions which support the establishment
of enhanced information sharing are developed in consultation with key stakeholders. The National
Framework, and the Bill which implements key aspects of the National Framework, were both
developed in close consultation with affected State and Territory agencies, the federal family law
courts, and peak national bodies representing women’s and children’s safety, the legal assistance
sector, and the legal profession.
Initial consultation on the National Framework and the Bill was then used in developing the initial
drafting of the Information Sharing Safeguards to be included in amendments to the Family Law
Regulations 1984 (the Regulations). The explanatory memorandum to the Bill sets out the proposed
minimum standards to be included in the Regulations.
The Attorney-General’s Department subsequently conducted a targeted exposure draft consultation
process on the proposed Family Law Amendment (Information Sharing) Regulations 2023 between
14 September 2023 and 11 October 2023. Consistent with consultations on the Bill, this targeted
process included affected State and Territory agencies, the federal family law courts, and peak national
bodies representing women’s and children’s safety, the legal assistance sector, and the legal profession.
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that the Family Law Amendment (Information Sharing) Bill 2023 is
amended to include a review of the operation of the Act no later than three years after its enactment
and in conjunction with a review of the Family Law Amendment Bill 2023.
Agreed
The Government agrees to Recommendation 2 of the Committee. The Bill as passed on 19 October
2023 included a Government amendment which provides that the Minister must commission a second
review of provisions, and supporting amendments to the Regulations, as soon as practicable after 3
years following commencement of the Bill’s provisions.
The Committee’s recommendation the secondary review be conducted in conjunction with a review
of the Family Law Amendment Bill 2023 will be addressed as part of the Government’s response to
the Committee’s Inquiry into that Bill.
