Australian Government Response to the Senate Standing
Committee on Education and Employment report:
Fair Work Amendment (Paid Family and Domestic Violence
Leave) Bill 2022 [Provisions]
February 2024
Overview
The Australian Government believes in the fundamental right of all people in Australia to
feel safe in their homes and in their workplaces. The Fair Work Amendment (Paid Family
and Domestic Violence Leave) Act 2022 (Amendment Act) was an important step
towards making sure that no employee is forced to make a choice between earning a
wage and protecting the safety of themselves and their family.
The Amendment Act was the first parliamentary action of the Hon Tony Burke MP, Minister
for Employment and Workplace Relations. This recognised the need to take quick action
towards the Government’s goal to end gender-based violence in Australia, set out by the
National Plan to End Violence against Women and Children 2022–32.
The Government recognises the importance of ensuring that this leave entitlement operates
effectively for employers as well as employees who are experiencing family and domestic
violence. This is why the Government has committed to a statutory independent review of the
operation of the Amendment Act to commence as soon as is practicable from
February 2024.
Committee Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the Australian Government commission an independent
review of the provisions of the Fair Work Amendment (Paid Family and Domestic Violence
Leave) Bill 2022 (bill) to be undertaken 18 months after the commencement of Schedule 1.
The committee further recommends that the review assess the adequacy of support and
guidance available to business to assist with implementation of the bill.
Response: Agreed in-principle.
During parliamentary debate, the Government agreed to amendments to the Fair Work
Amendment (Paid Family and Domestic Violence Leave) Bill 2022 requiring the Minister to
commission an independent review of the operation of the paid family and domestic
violence leave provisions.
The review must commence as soon as practicable 12 months from the commencement of
Schedule 1 of the Amendment Act on 1 February 2023. In accordance with the
Amendment Act, it must consider:
 the impact of the amendments on small businesses, sole traders and people
experiencing family and domestic violence, and
 both quantitative and qualitative research.
The review must be provided as a written report to the Minister within 3 months of
commencement of the review, and be tabled in both Houses of Parliament within 15
sitting days from the report being given to the Minister.
The Government intends that the review will also consider the adequacy of support and
guidance available to business to assist with implementation of the legislation, as
recommended by the Committee.
2
Committee Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that the Senate pass the bill.
Response: Agreed.
The Senate passed the legislation on 26 October 2022 and it passed both Houses of
Parliament on 27 October 2022. The Amendment Act received Royal Assent on
9 November 2022.
Coalition Senators’ Recommendation 1
The Coalition Senators recommend:
 Government provide greater details about the impact of the FDVL model on small
and family businesses, particularly regarding casual workers, and provide
additional assistance to ensure these businesses are not adversely affected by
the administration of the scheme or worse off financially;
 the legislation be amended to clarify the reporting obligations for employers with
respect to paid FDVL;
 the legislation be amended to ensure perpetrators of FDV cannot access the
proposed new paid entitlement;
 a 12-month review, following the implementation of the legislation, which would
seek both qualitative and quantitative research on the impact for small businesses;
and
 a 12-month review, following the implementation of the legislation, which would
assess the impact on sole business.
Response: Noted.
In relation to the recommendations around the reporting obligations for employers and
perpetrators not being able to access family and domestic violence leave, the Government’s
position was outlined during parliamentary debate (see Senate Hansard, 26 October 2022,
pages 1565 and 1567-68). The Government made clear that the legislation does not impose
any reporting obligations on employers and that an employee will only be able to access the
leave if they are experiencing family and domestic violence.
As detailed in response to Committee Recommendation 1, the Amendment Act requires an
independent review of the operation of the provisions be conducted. This review will
provide Government with the opportunity to consider qualitative and quantitative research
on the operation of the Amendment Act to understand the impact of the entitlement,
including on small businesses and sole traders.
The Government recognises the importance of ensuring small business are equipped to
understand and administer the paid family and domestic violence leave entitlement
sensitively and lawfully. The Small Business Assistance package announced in the 2022–23
Budget provides $3.4 million over 4 years to deliver a range of holistic supports to help small
businesses implement paid family and domestic violence leave. This funding supports:
 the Fair Work Ombudsman to update and develop new resources and provide
targeted workplace relations advice and education
 the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations to procure tailored
workplace relations guidance and support for small business
3
 commissioning of an independent review to be undertaken as soon as is
practicable from 1 February 2024, which will assess support to small business and
examine the effectiveness and scope of the legislation.
Measures now in place to support small business implement the leave entitlement include:
 The Fair Work Ombudsman has updated material and developed new information
and resources in consultation with small business, advocacy, and employee
representatives. Updates include information about the new paid family and
domestic violence leave changes, covering when the leave applies, payment for the
leave, notice and evidence requirements, how to record the leave on a payslip and
privacy issues. Small businesses can also contact the Fair Work Ombudsman’s Small
Business Helpline and Employer Advisory Service for additional assistance.
 Through an open market process, the Government procured a stand-alone website
providing guidance and support for small business to understand their obligations
to provide paid family and domestic violence leave, administer the leave
entitlement sensitively and lawfully, and competently manage associated issues.
The website, www.10dayspaidFDVleave.com, was developed in partnership with
small business representatives and family and domestic violence sector experts.
 A podcast titled ‘Small business, big impact: how to support employees experiencing
family and domestic violence’ was launched on 1 August 2023 to provide practical
and accessible advice for small businesses so they can appropriately support their
employees when they apply for family and domestic violence leave. In addition,
information and support is available through 1800RESPECT, the national domestic,
family and sexual violence counselling, information and support service on 1800 737
732 or via 1800RESPECT.org.au.
Together, these measures ensure small business can access the right advice at the right time
to provide support to their employees experiencing family and domestic violence.
Australian Greens Senators’ Recommendation 1
That any financial support package provided by the government be contingent on
recipient businesses offering paid FDV leave to employees at the earliest possible
opportunity.
Response: Noted.
The Government recognises that small businesses may need extra support to implement the
entitlement as they often have more limited resources and may not have access to payroll
and human resources expertise. To reflect this, the paid family and domestic violence leave
entitlement did not commence for employees employed by small businesses until
1 August 2023, 6 months later than the commencement date for employees employed
by non-small business employers.
The Small Business Assistance package announced in the 2022–23 Budget provided
$3.4 million to provide support measures to small business, as outlined above. This measure
does not include delivery of funding directly to small businesses implementing the new
leave entitlement, but rather provides support to ensure they have guidance and relevant
materials to help them implement the entitlement.
4
Australian Greens Senators’ Recommendation 2
That the 18 month review of the Bill consider the definition of family and domestic
violence in the Fair Work Act 2009 in the context of harmonisation initiatives, and
consider whether to expand leave entitlements to family, domestic and sexual violence.
Response: Noted.
The review of the amendments made by the Amendment Act will be independent of
government and capable of considering the definition of family and domestic violence for
the purposes of the leave entitlement, including whether the definition should be revised.
The Government notes that the Fair Work Act 2009 contains a definition of family and
domestic violence in subsection 106B(2) that applies for the purposes of the Act, including an
employee’s entitlement to paid family and domestic violence leave. The Government has
committed to progressing a national definition of family and domestic violence that includes
coercive control. A national definition of family and domestic violence will help inform a
common understanding of family and domestic violence nationally and across jurisdictions.
Progression of a national definition requires a coordinated approach from Commonwealth,
state and territory governments and will progress separately to the statutory independent
review of the Amendment Act.
Australian Greens Senators’ Recommendation 3
That resources developed by the Fair Work Ombudsman to support implementation of
the Bill provide clear guidance to employers regarding evidentiary requirements,
including:
 requests for documentation should be kept to a minimum.
 employers should be flexible about what documentation is sufficient.
 approval of leave should not be deferred while waiting for evidence to be
provided.
 employers must have clear processes to prevent disclosure of any documentation
requested. Ideally, evidence could be sighted by the employer and returned to the
employee, rather than kept on file. The employee file can record that appropriate
documentation was provided without any further detail.
Response: Noted.
As part of the Small Business Assistance package announced in the 2022–23 Budget, the
Government provided the Fair Work Ombudsman with $2.2 million over 4 years to update
its workplace relations advice and education tools and resource its advice and education
channels.
The Fair Work Ombudsman website, www.fairwork.gov.au/leave/family-and-domestic-
violence-leave, has free information and resources available now on evidentiary
requirements for the new entitlement. This includes:
 a fact sheet with information on key aspects of the new entitlement, including when
the leave can be taken, how it is paid, notice and evidence requirements, privacy and
pay slip rules, as well as an example about accessing the entitlement
5
 online learning courses on difficult conversations in the workplace, record keeping and
payslips, workplace flexibility and the Fair Work Information Statement. These have
been updated with information about paid family and domestic violence leave.
The Fair Work Ombudsman also updated its small business ‘Employer Guide to Family and
Domestic Violence’ ahead of the extension of the entitlement to employees of small
businesses from 1 August 2023. The guide promotes best practice by helping employers
to understand their responsibilities to employees experiencing family or domestic
violence. The guide also includes information on how to support employees experiencing
family or domestic violence, manage family and domestic violence issues in the
workplace, and develop a workplace response to family and domestic violence.
The Fair Work Ombudsman has also developed information in multiple languages.
Australian Greens Senators’ Recommendations 4 and 5
4. That s106B be amended to:
 expand s.106B(1)(a) to include [sic] apply to an employee who ‘has experienced, or
is experiencing, family and domestic violence’;
 amend s.106B(1)(c) to read ‘it is impractical or unsafe for the employee to do that
thing outside the employee’s ordinary hours of work’ (emphasis added);
 expand the examples provided in Note 1 to s.106B(1) to include arranging for the
care of children, securing alternative housing, and addressing long term physical
and mental health issues relating to the family and domestic violence; and
 clarify that the examples provided in Note 1 are not exhaustive.
Response: Noted.
See response to Australian Greens recommendation 5 below.
5. That the Bill be amended to provide an entitlement for unpaid FDV leave where
employees have exhausted their annual 10 days of paid leave. This could be modelled
on the Western Australian Government provisions, or explicitly provide for at least 4
additional days of unpaid leave. Employers may also, at their discretion, provide
additional paid FDV leave, in advance or by agreement.
Response: Noted.
Parliament considered elements of these recommendations by way of non-Government
amendments moved by the Australian Greens in the Senate (see Senate Hansard, 26
October 2022, pages 1560 and 1665). The amendments were not agreed to by the
Senate.
In relation to the proposed amendments to s 106B, the Government recognises the policy
concerns underlying the recommendation, but considers the existing language of the
provision is sufficiently clear to address them, as set out in the Government’s contribution
to the parliamentary debate.
The Government’s priority for the Amendment Act was to ensure that no-one should have
to choose between their pay and safety. The Amendment Act achieves this objective and is
world-leading in terms of scope and entitlements for paid family and domestic violence
leave. The Amendment Act builds in a requirement for an independent review of the
legislation as soon as is practicable 12 months after commencement of the reforms.
6
The independent review will provide a critical opportunity to consider the effectiveness
and scope of the legislation and the impact it has had on people experiencing family and
domestic violence.
Australian Greens Senators’ Recommendation 6
That the Fair Work Act 2009 (Cth) be amended to include ‘experiencing family and
domestic violence’ and requesting FDV leave as protected characteristics under s.35(1)
[sic].
That the 18 month review examine any evidence of gender discrimination resulting from
the Bill and consider whether family and domestic violence should be a protected
attr ibute under the Sex Discrimination Act 1984 (Cth).
Response: Noted.
The Government notes that an employee’s access to paid family and domestic violence leave
is already protected under the Fair Work Act 2009. The general protections provision in
section 340 of the Fair Work Act 2009 prohibits a person taking adverse action against
another person because they have a workplace right, whether or not they seek to exercise
this right. A person has a workplace right if they are entitled to a benefit under a workplace
law, which includes the new paid family and domestic violence leave entitlement.
The Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes) Act 2023 (Closing Loopholes Act)
passed Parliament on 7 December 2023. The Closing Loopholes Act amended the Fair Work
Act 2009 to strengthen existing workplace protections against discrimination for employees
who have been, or continue to be, subjected to family and domestic violence, including by:
 making ‘subjection to family a domestic violence’ a new protected attribute under
section 351 of the Fair Work Act 2009, thereby prohibiting a national system
employer from taking adverse action against an employee or prospective employee
on that basis (e.g. dismissing an employee or not hiring a prospective employee)
 prohibiting employers who are not covered by Part 3-1 (General Protections) of
the Fair Work Act 2009 from terminating an employee’s employment on the basis
of their ‘subjection to family and domestic violence’
 prohibiting modern awards and enterprise agreements from including terms that
discriminate against employees because of, or for reasons including, their
subjection to family and domestic violence
 requiring the Fair Work Commission, when performing its functions or exercising
its powers under the Fair Work Act 2009 in relation to a matter, to take into
account the need to respect and value the diversity of the workforce by helping to
prevent and eliminate discrimination on the basis of subjection to family and
domestic violence.
While the Sex Discrimination Act 1984 does not directly prohibit discrimination on the
grounds of someone experiencing family and domestic violence, the Government notes the
work of the Australian Human Rights Commission in conciliating human rights and
discrimination complaints and promoting Australians’ rights and freedoms. The Government
also notes the current work of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights, which
is considering Australia’s human rights and anti-discrimination framework.
7
Australian Greens Senators’ Recommendation 7
That the Government ensure that the Bill is part of a broad suite of reforms to implement
the new National Plan to End Violence Against Women and Children. At a minimum, this
should include:
 Increasing funding to frontline services to $1 billion annually to meet
expected demand.
 Measures to address the housing crisis that makes it difficult for women fleeing
abusive relationships to find new accommodation.
 Increasing income support payments so women without stable employment
(and access to paid FDV leave) can still have the financial security to leave
abusive relationships.27
 Reviewing the Escaping Violence Payments and streamlining
administrative processes for accessing Centrelink crisis payments.
 Requiring employers to accept reasonable requests for flexible
working arrangements.
Response: Partially agree.
Ending violence against women and children is a national priority. Paid family and domestic
violence leave joins the range of tools available to address violence against women and
children. The Government acknowledges the resistance and resilience of victim-survivors of
family and domestic violence and is committed to providing the national leadership and
investment needed to address family and domestic violence.
This is demonstrated through the Government's investment of $2.3 billion to support the
implementation of the National Plan to End Violence against Women and Children 2022–
2032 since October 2022. This investment will guide efforts and actions over the next
decade towards the vision of ending gender-based violence in one generation.
Building on the $1.7 billion in the October 2022–23 Budget, the Government has invested
a further $589.3 million in the 2023–24 Budget to support the National Plan including:
 $159.0 million over 2 years from 2023–24 to extend the National Partnership on
Family, Domestic and Sexual Violence Responses with state and territory
governments. This funding will continue to bolster frontline family, domestic, and
sexual violence supports to ensure women and children can access support when
they need it
 $38.2 million in additional funding to extend the current Escaping Violence Payment
Trial and the Temporary Visa Holders Experiencing Violence Pilot until
31 January 2025, which will provide much needed support for individuals leaving
violent relationships
 $2.8 million over 3 years from 2023–24 to develop a National Model of Care to assist
the sector in providing appropriate supports and services that meet the safety and
recovery needs of children and young people in emergency accommodation settings
 $24.3 million over 4 years from 2023–24 (and $5.9 million per year ongoing) to pilot
an additional referral pathway for the Support for Trafficked People Program and
restructure the program to better meet the needs of victim-survivors, while
increasing ongoing funding to address current and projected demand.
Key measures in the October 2022–23 Budget included:
8
 $169.4 million in funding for state and territory governments for 500 new
frontline and community sector workers nationally to support women and
children experiencing family, domestic, and sexual violence
 $30 million for measures under Safe and Supported: The National Framework for
Protecting Australia’s Children 2021–2031. The measures support outcomes under
the Safe and Supported Action Plans, which were released on 31 January 2023. The
measures also support the need for prevention and early intervention to prevent
and protect children from violence, as identified in the National Plan
 $100 million over 5 years from 2022–23 to continue funding under the Safe Places
Emergency Accommodation Program through the Safe Places Emergency
Accommodation Inclusion Round (Inclusion Round). The Inclusion Round will
increase the number of new and appropriate emergency accommodation places
across Australia, with a focus on providing support for First Nations women and
children, women and children from culturally and linguistically diverse
backgrounds, and women and children with disability
o The Safe Places program is a capital works grants program funding the
building, renovation or purchase of new emergency accommodation for
women and children experiencing family and domestic violence.
The Government invested $72.6 million over 2020–21 to 2024–25 in the
program.
Housing
The Government is supporting the delivery of more social and affordable housing through
its $10 billion Housing Australia Future Fund (HAFF). The HAFF will fund 30,000 new social
and affordable housing properties. 4,000 of those social housing dwellings will be allocated
for women and children experiencing family and domestic violence and older women at risk
of homelessness. In addition to other acute housing needs, the HAFF will also fund $100
million in the first 5 years for crisis and transitional housing options for women and children
experiencing family and domestic violence and older women who are at risk of
homelessness.
The Government has funded the Keeping Women Safe in their Homes (KWSITH) program
since 2015–16. In the October 2022–23 Budget, a further $41.7 million was allocated to
continue KWSITH to 2026–27. The KWSITH program supports women and their children to
stay in their own home, or a home of their choice, where it is safe and appropriate to do so,
through a range of safety responses such as risk assessments, safety planning, home
security audits and upgrades. The KWSITH program supports greater housing stability by
providing women with an alternative to homeless shelters and emergency accommodation,
and reduces some strain on emergency accommodation providers.
National Partnership on Family, Domestic and Sexual Violence Responses (FDSV National
Partnership)
Investment of $159.0 million over 2 years announced in the 2023–24 Budget builds on the
$270.7 million provided over 2 years from 2021–22 under the FDSV National Partnership,
and the $169.4 million committed in the October 2022–23 Budget for 500 workers and
innovative perpetrator response initiatives. Under the FDSV National Partnership, funding
is conditional on contributions from states, in recognition that responding to violence is a
shared responsibility of all Australian governments and that states have primary
9
responsibility for frontline services, and to ensure that critical services are able to
meet demand. States are responsible for distributing the funding under the FDSV
National Partnership to services based on needs in their jurisdictions.
Social security
The National Plan notes that Australia’s social security system supports victims and survivors
to not only leave a violent relationship, but also to establish a life free from violence.
Examples of support include the Crisis Payment, Rent Assistance, and higher single rates of
social security payments. The Government has committed to review the adequacy of
income support payments at each Budget.
Services Australia provides assistance and support to victim-survivors guided by the
Agency’s Family and Domestic Violence Strategy. To reinforce this commitment, a range
of strategies have been implemented to ensure the safety of customers and their families,
including providing staff with regular training and guidance materials to help identify
when customers may be experiencing violence. Training and guidance materials are
regularly reviewed to ensure they are up to date and appropriate.
Child Support
As part of the 2023–24 Budget, the Government has committed $5.1 million to implement
the Government’s response to key Child Support recommendations made by the Joint Select
Committee on Australia’s Family Law System including:
 establishing a Child Support Stakeholder Consultation Group with key stakeholders
who will perform an important advisory role for Government on policy and service
delivery issues that affect the operation of the Child Support Scheme and positive
outcomes for separated parents
 reviewing Child Support collection arrangements, and commissioning an evaluation
of separated families to understand the issues vulnerable parents (including parents
experiencing family and domestic violence) experience, and barriers to address
those issues if the Child Support collection arrangement breaks down
 reviewing the interactions between the scheme and Family Tax Benefit (FTB) to
ensure these programs are working effectively together to support separated
parents, including vulnerable parents, and their children
 reviewing compliance with Child Support assessments, with a focus on collection and
enforcement.
Income support payments
As part of the 2023–24 Budget, the Government delivered a $14.6 billion cost of living
package, which includes the following measures which increased income support
payments:
 $4.9 billion to increase the rate of working age payments by $40 per fortnight and
move single JobSeeker Payment recipients aged 55 years and over after 9 continuous
months on payment to the higher single rate. This will benefit around 580,000
women
 $1.9 billion to extend Parenting Payment (Single) to parents until their youngest
child is aged 14 years. This will benefit around 52,000 women
10
 $2.7 billion to increase Commonwealth Rent Assistance maximum rates by 15
per cent.
The new rates commenced on 20 September 2023, further indexation of eligible payment
rates also took place as usual on 20 September 2023.
Escaping Violence Payment (EVP)
Economic abuse involves control, exploitation or sabotage of finances which affects a
person’s ability to obtain, use, or maintain economic resources, threatening their economic
security and potential for independence. The EVP trial provides support packages of up to
$5,000 to eligible individuals to establish a home free from violence. The EVP trial reduces
the financial barriers for individuals experiencing violence to leave an abusive relationship.
An extension of the trial until the end of January 2025 was announced in the 2023–24
Budget. The trial is being independently evaluated and this will provide the Government
with an evidence base to consider the future of the program.
Right to request flexible working arrangements
The Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Secure Jobs, Better Pay) Act 2022 has strengthened
the right to request flexible working arrangements in the National Employment Standards.
These amendments commenced on 6 June 2023.
The right to request flexible working arrangements has been expanded to employees who
are pregnant as well as situations where an employee, or a member of their immediate
family or household, experiences family and domestic violence. This amendment aligns the
coverage of family violence with the entitlement to paid family and domestic violence leave
in the National Employment Standards.
The amendments make the right to request flexible working arrangements an enforceable
right and allow the Fair Work Commission to deal with disputes about requests, including by
arbitration. However, arbitration is a last resort and the Commission must attempt
conciliation or mediation before arbitration unless there are exceptional circumstances.
Employers may only refuse a request on reasonable business grounds.
There is also a fair and transparent process for responding to requests for flexible working
arrangements, based on the Commission’s model term for flexible working arrangements in
modern awards.
11
