Australian Government

Australian Government response to the
House Standing Committee on Health, Aged Care
and Sport report on the /nguiry into Long COVID

and Repeated COVID Infections:

Sick and tired: Casting a long shadow

February 2024

Contents

INtrOGUCTION............::cccccccecsseeecsnsssecstsessnscseeecseeeeeeeeeseeeereeeeseaeesesaesnsaeesesaaessssendaneeasenenscanessgnessetens 3
Recommendations and the Australian Government’s Response ..............cccscssscrsseessseeereees 4
RECOMMENAATION 1............cssccsssecsseeccsseeessecsesseeeeeeeseeeessasessaseusseaesessaesenecesccueesegeeetenseeerseeensnees 4
RECOMMENAATION 2 ..........c:scccscccesteccsseecsseceeceeeeeseecececesseeescnseesseaesensanecseaesceneseaseosesnnesereneestenens 6
RECOMMENAATION 3B ............csccscesecesesseecsnseneseeesseesseneesseaesceuessunesssenseevsesseeveessrseerssneeseeeeeeseeess 7
RECOMMENAATION 4............ ce ecceeesseeeeeeteeeesecessaaeesaensanensesecetensetseneessueeesresseresssensssesseseeaecenees 10
RECOMMENAATION 5 ..........:ccccseccesessseecerseeeseeeseseesenseessnecsevsauceneecesseuecesoauersuseesseucneesesseeegesaees 12
RECOMMENAATION 6............::cccscceessccessneeesnneesenseeesseceenseceveseeescsnnsessersessesseeeeeeseeeneeseenessentenees 14
RECOMMENAATION 7 .............cccccessccesereeeenteeessaaeerseasesseuessescessostsecesscseensesescesscseeseesseeneeuereeseees 18
RECOMMENAATION B ..............ccccceecceesseeeecneeetseaseseccansoeseecenscesscsescsrsceuseecesseseseeneesereeessseeaers 20
RECOMMENCARION 9 o.u........ cece ces sccccsceneeeeeneeteseeeenenereneneeseeeeaes ae cere cee, Be oe... 21

Introduction

The Australian Government welcomes the opportunity to respond to the report of the
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Health, Aged Care and Sport (the
Committee) Inquiry into Long COVID and Repeated COVID Infections, Sick and Tired: Casting
a Long Shadow (the Inquiry Report). The Government thanks the Committee for its work,
and the wide range of organisations and individuals who made contributions to the Inquiry.

The Inquiry commenced following a referral from the Minister for Health and Aged Care, the
Hon Mark Butler MP, on 1 September 2022. The Committee received over 560 submissions
from individuals, community groups, leading health experts, prominent public health
organisations and state and territory health departments. Four public hearings were also
held over October 2022 to February 2023, in which select testimonies were heard.

The Inquiry Report was tabled in the House of Representatives on 19 April 2023. It
contained nine recommendations for consideration by the Government, aimed at building
understanding and awareness of long COVID, and strengthening support for people living
with long COVID. The report also recognised the chronic nature of long COVID and the need
for multidisciplinary primary care-based health services and supports in its management.

The Government acknowledges the term ‘long COVID’ has been used in the Inquiry Report.
However, in alignment with Recommendation 2, the term Post-Acute Sequelae of COVID-19
(PASC) will be used throughout this document. PASC encompass the wide range of
presentations and symptoms that can be experienced after the acute phase of COVID-19
and recognises the potential long-term impact of COVID-19 on multiple systems in the body.

The COVID-19 pandemic continues to have direct and indirect health impacts for people, as
well as the health system and its workforce. While vaccinations, oral antiviral treatments
and the continuing public health response have provided strong protection against severe
disease and death, the threat of COVID-19 remains very real, particularly for those in our
community who are most at risk of severe illness. Attention must also be turned to long-
term impacts of COVID-19, including those that experience prolonged symptoms following
an acute COVID-19 infection.

The Government is committed to supporting a strong healthcare system that will deliver
effective patient-centred care for people diagnosed with PASC and provide the best possible
health and wellbeing outcomes for patients.

Recommendations and the Australian Government’s Response

Recommendation 1

7.1 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government establishes and
funds a single COVID-19 database to be administered by the soon-to-be developed Centre for
Disease Control to capture data on:
e COVID-19 infections, complications, hospitalisations, and deaths as well as recurrent
COVID infections
oO This should incorporate COVID-19 infections in high-risk populations including:
hospital-acquired infections (distinguishing this from community acquisition if
possible), infections in aged care and other institutions, and infections in Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander peoples and the immunosuppressed
o This should also include the collection of data regarding select comorbid conditions
and ancestry to identify infections in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples,
culturally and linguistically diverse communities and the immunosuppressed
e Long COVID diagnoses including post COVID complications
e COVID-19 vaccination rates, vaccination side effects and post vaccination deaths

7.2. The Committee additionally recommends that the Australian Government explore the
use of innovative tools (e.g. artificial intelligence and self-managed care platforms) and data
linkage within and between states and territories, to collect this data.

The Australian Government supports in-principle the recommendation to establish a
single COVID-19 database.

The Government recognises the benefits of integrated data sets for COVID-19 and other
infectious diseases and has numerous projects underway to improve data integration.
Linking data can produce the same benefits as establishing a single database and may have
benefits in terms of lower cost and higher participation in data collection. Distributed
approaches to collecting and sharing data can also have other benefits, including improved
data security. However, Australia faces challenges in data linkage including interoperability
of existing systems, differences in data collection between systems, including state and
territory collections and existing databases that do not capture the full range of useful
information.

While the functions of the Australian Centre for Disease Control (CDC) are still being
finalised, it is anticipated that some data-related activities will fall within its scope. Given
data is collected by jurisdictions, in primary care, and the private sectors, the
Commonwealth will work with state and territory governments, clinical service providers,
researchers and others to improve national health data collections. Specific assessment will
be required for priority populations, including First Nations people, older people, people
receiving aged care, people with disability, people from a culturally and linguistically diverse
(CALD) background, people experiencing socio-economic disadvantage, people living in rural

and remote areas and people with mental illness. First Nations Data Sovereignty principles
should be considered in data collection, storage and use..

In 2021, the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) was funded $3 million from
the Medical Research Future Fund (MRFF) to establish a national linked data platform that
integrates COVID-19 case information with a range of relevant existing health datasets.
Significant work was undertaken to collect COVID-19 identifiers from states and territories
and link these to a range of datasets including hospitalisations, aged care, immunisations
and deaths to create a single national COVID-19 database, the COVID-19 Register. This de-
identified dataset has over 6 million cases across 7 of 8 jurisdictions and includes
information on First Nations people, chronic conditions and multiple infections. Using the
hospitalisations data, hospital acquired infections can be identified.

The AIHW and Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) are currently examining options to bring
together some of the data in separate linked datasets such as the COVID Register and
Person-Level Integrated Data Asset (formerly known as Multi-Agency Data Integration
Project), potentially through the Australian National Data Integration Infrastructure (ANDI!)
project. Any future investments in data should leverage the specialist skills within existing
Commonwealth agencies and complement the existing programs of work in data linkage.

The Australian Government supports in-principle the recommendation to explore the use
of innovative tools and data linkage for data collection.

The value of data linkage work extends beyond COVID-19 and into many other settings,
including other infectious diseases and chronic conditions. The Health Data Collaboration,
which is chaired by the Commonwealth, reports to the Health Chief Executive Officers’
Forum and is driving work to improve safe health data sharing across jurisdictions.

In addition to the work already undertaken by the AIHW, the Government will continue
working with states and territories to link COVID-19 case data to support:
e More comprehensive COVID-19 case identification and the study of long-term health
effects associated with COVID-19
e A better understanding of the impacts of COVID-19 in population groups including
First Nations people, people with disability, older Australians including aged care
recipients, and people with a CALD background.

The Government recognises the importance of partnering with First Nations people to
ensure:
e their priorities are reflected in data about their communities;
e their capability is developed to engage with and use data;
e they are provided with knowledge of data availability, uses, and accessibility; and
e they are included in data systems and governance.

Recommendation 2

7.3. The Committee recommends that at the present time the World Health Organization
definition of long COVID be used clinically, but that the Australian Government Department of
Health and Aged Care work with the states and territories to review this definition as more
research and information becomes available.

7.4 The Committee additionally recommends developing evidence-based living guidelines
for diagnosis and treatment incorporating tiered care including referral pathways, co-
designed with patients with lived experience.

The Australian Government supports the recommendation to use the World Health
Organization (WHO) definition of long COVID in Australia.

The Government recognises that a nationally consistent definition of PASC is a key enabler
for research, surveillance, diagnosis and management. The Government supports the use of
the WHO definition of ‘post COVID-19 condition’ to define PASC in Australia:

As new research and evidence emerges, the definition may need to be reviewed. Such a
review would require input from researchers, clinical and surveillance experts, and the
states and territories.

The term PASC has been chosen in lieu of long COVID to encompass the wide range of
presentations and symptoms that can be experienced after the acute phase of COVID-19,
and to recognise the potential long-term impact of COVID-19 on multiple systems in the
body. Long COVID is a term used commonly in the community to describe both ongoing
symptomatic COVID-19 (symptoms lasting more than four weeks) and PASC.

The Australian Government supports the recommendation to develop evidence-based
guidelines for diagnosis and treatment of people with long COVID.

The Government supports the development of evidence-based guidelines and treatment
pathways to enable a consistent approach for the management of people with PASC, and
the involvement of people with lived experience of PASC and the organisations that
represent them in that process.

The Government also previously contracted the Royal Australian College of General
Practitioners (RACGP) to develop guidance materials relating to long COVID. Health
practitioner guidelines and a resource to support patients in managing PASC were published
in late 2021.

Recommendation 3

7.5 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government establish a nationally
coordinated research program, led by the Department of Health and Aged Care (preferably
the Centre for Disease Control), to coordinate and fund COVID-19 and long COVID research.
7.6 This funding should be longer term and be nationally coordinated. The funding should
aim to better integrate research by fostering greater collaboration rather than fragmentation.

7.7. The Committee also recommends that this research have adequate representation
from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and the culturally and linguistically diverse
population and be adequately funded to achieve these aims. Other vulnerable groups
including the elderly, children, people with disability and the immunosuppressed should be
represented.

7.8 Research programs should span basic science, clinical trials, models of care, health
promotion and implementation science.

The Australian Government notes the recommendation to establish a nationally
coordinated research program for COVID-19 and long COVID research.

The Government supports the coordination of research on COVID-19 and PASC, providing
direct support for health and medical research through the complementary MRFF and the
National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC).

The MRFF has invested $130 million in COVID-19 research on 80 projects across 24 grant
opportunities/rounds, which includes $13 million in funding for PASC research. These grant
opportunities cover a variety of themes, including vaccine development, antiviral
treatments, public health and prevention. Over $48.1 million has also been made available
for 44 research projects relevant to COVID-19 and $1.6 million for two projects on PASC
through the NHMRC. In May 2023, another $5 million was invested in the Australian
Partnership for Preparedness Research on Infectious Disease Emergencies (APPRISE) to
expand and reinvigorate a single, multidisciplinary, nationally focused team, which will
undertake two research projects exploring the impact of PASC, and the use and
effectiveness of COVID-19 antivirals. Through this funding, APPRISE will also establish a First
Nations Pandemic Research Preparedness Network to enable and amplify a First Nations
perspective on research and preparedness for infectious disease emergencies.

An additional $50 million has been made available through the MRFF for research into PASC.
The funding will be provided through the MRFF Post-Acute Sequelae of COVID-19 Research
Plan (MRFF PASC Research Plan), which has been developed by an Expert Advisory Panel to
ensure investments focus on the areas most likely to improve patient outcomes and health
care experiences. The first of two grant opportunities disbursing this $50 million in funding
opened on 6 September 2023, to enable projects to commence from Quarter 2 2024. The
research projects are intended to generate evidence to inform policy and clinical guidance
and improve health outcomes.

The Australian CDC may have a role in influencing public health research priorities,
particularly in the context of communicable diseases and pandemic management. However,
the Australian CDC’s scope and role in Australia’s research landscape has not yet been
finalised and is subject to further consultation and agreement.

The Australian Government supports in-principle the recommendation that funding
should be longer term and be nationally coordinated.

As described above, the Government funds and coordinates health and medical research,
including for COVID-19 and PASC, through the MRFF and NHMRC. As part of this, $50 million
has been invested through the MRFF over 5 years from 2023-24 for a research program on
PASC. This is in addition to funding available through other NHMRC and MRFF grant
opportunities.

The Australian Government supports the recommendation that research should have
adequate representation from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, the culturally
and linguistically diverse population and other vulnerable groups.

Under the MRFF PASC Research Plan, multiple priorities for investment specify the need to
actively include priority populations in research. For example, Aim 4 of the plan prioritises
research investment that demonstrates co-design and co-implementation with priority
populations. For projects under Aim 4 that focus on First Nations people, demonstrated
leadership by First Nations people and communities in the design and implementation of
the research is required. This approach is consistent with the Government’s commitments
under the National Agreement on Closing the Gap.

More broadly, the MRFF has identified First Nations and CALD people as priority populations
for all funding opportunities. Further, many MRFF grant opportunities include funding
streams specifically targeted to improving the health and wellbeing of these communities.

The Government provides support to multiple expert advisory committees, including but
not limited to the National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation, COVID-19
Response Disability Advisory Committee, Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Communities
Health Advisory Group and Aged Care Advisory Group. Where appropriate, researchers may
seek advice from relevant expert advisory committees.

The Australian Government supports in-principle the recommendation that research
programs should span basic science, clinical trials, models of care, health promotion and
implementation science.

The Government supports health and medical research through MRFF and NHMRC grant
opportunities, which support a broad range of research types. In particular, the $50 million
investment through the MRFF PASC Research Plan includes support for basic science, clinical
trials, and models of care.

Recommendation 4

7.9 The Committee recommends that the Department of Health and Aged Care updates,
focusses, and improves its COVID-19 vaccination communication strategy including by:
Emphasising the benefit of COVID-19 vaccines in both reducing transmission and illness

severity for acute COVID-19 infections and reducing the risk of developing long COVID
Encouraging greater COVID-19 vaccination across the Australian population especially
among children, young people and people of working age

Encouraging immunisation in high-risk groups in particular as the virus becomes endemic
Working with the states and territories to develop this health promotion program.

The Australian Government supports the recommendation to update and improve its
COVID-19 vaccination communication strategy.

The Government continues to communicate the importance of vaccination and behaviours
to protect against COVID-19. Primary prevention methods continue to be important in
reducing the incidence of COVID-19 and subsequent complications, such as PASC.

With high levels of hybrid immunity, ongoing communication will have a particular focus on
the vulnerable and at-risk populations. Communication will be tailored for different
vulnerable groups to ensure messaging is relevant and accessible. This includes translation
and co-design with priority populations.

The National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Protection Sub-Committee
(NATSIHP) of the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC) will be
considered as part of the information sharing approach, as it provides holistic and culturally
safe advice on health protection for First Nations people. NATSIHP also has a key role in
strengthening partnerships to ensure shared decision-making. This includes partnering with
the National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation and Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Community Controlled Health Services to assist in the collection and
analysis of data and in the promotion of culturally appropriate information on PASC written
in First Nations people's own languages.

The Government’s 2023-24 Budget commitment of $4.7 million will continue to support
community-led and tailored solutions to effectively engage CALD communities in the COVID-
19 vaccine program and ensure CALD health consumers and communities have better
access to COVID-19 vaccinations and information.

The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (ATAGI) closely monitors all
current and emerging evidence on COVID-19 vaccines to make evidence-based
recommendations to the Government on vaccines in the COVID-19 Vaccination Program.
While primary course COVID-19 vaccinations are encouraged across age groups, the
evidence supports different booster recommendations based on age and risk factors. The
Government will encourage vaccination in line with ATAGI advice and best available
evidence.

10

It is not possible to pre-empt changes to ATAGI advice, nor broader recommendations for
the COVID-19 Vaccination Program. Updated recommendations to the Minister for Health
and Aged Care are made as required, based on any emerging evidence. Stakeholders and
states and territories will continue to be engaged.

11

Recommendation 5

7.10 The Committee recommends that the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee
regularly review the benefits of antiviral treatments for COVID-19 in accordance with
emerging research with a view to expanding the list of groups eligible to access these
treatments through the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).

7.11 The Committee also recommends that antiviral treatments for COVID-19 be
approached as a pharmacist-initiated medication to participants eligible under the PBS.

7.12 The Committee additionally recommends that the Australian Government review its
framework for access to antiviral treatments for COVID-19 to include non-mortality and non-
hospitalisation outcomes such as productivity gains, time to illness resolution, return to work
and number of health encounters.

The Australian Government supports the recommendation to regularly review the PBS
listings for antiviral treatments for COVID-19 in accordance with emerging research.

The Government recognises the importance of ensuring eligibility for oral antiviral
treatments for COVID-19 remains in line with emerging research.

In accordance with its establishing legislation, the statutory Pharmaceutical Benefits
Advisory Committee (PBAC) advises the Minister for Health and Aged Care about medicines
and medicinal preparations that should be funded on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme
(PBS). The PBAC is an independent, expert body comprising doctors, health professionals,
health economists and consumer representatives.

The PBAC has already reviewed and expanded eligibility criteria for COVID-19 antivirals. The
PBAC will again consider the PBS listings of both COVID-19 oral antiviral treatments in 2023,
taking into account the evolving evidence on COVID-19 and available treatments.

The PBAC’s consideration is generally initiated when the pharmaceutical company
responsible for a specific medicine submits an application for PBS listing. This is because
pharmaceutical companies usually hold scientific data and other information necessary to
inform the PBAC’s consideration. The PBAC cannot be directed by the Government in how it
conducts its statutory functions, including to have a view towards expanding eligible groups.
It reviews and applies evidence of safety, clinical effectiveness and cost effectiveness in
making its recommendations to Government, as required by its establishing legislation.

12

The Australian Government does not support the recommendation that antiviral
treatments for COVID-19 be approached as a pharmacist-initiated medication to
participants eligible under the PBS.

Antiviral treatments for COVID-19 are currently classified as Schedule 4 (‘Prescription Only’)
medicines through their scheduling in the Poisons Standard. Schedule 4 medicines are
intended to be prescribed by medical or dental professionals, in accordance with the
national policy for applying access restrictions on all poisons agreed by the Commonwealth
and all state and territory health ministers (the Scheduling Policy Framework (SPF)).

Under state and territory law, pharmacists are usually prohibited from prescribing Schedule
4 medicines, but this is ultimately a matter for states and territories, which implement the
Poisons Standard through local Poisons Acts or equivalent. For example, pharmacists are
able to initiate COVID-19 vaccinations under the law of many states and territories.

The Government must comply with current legislation, which does not support pharmacists
dispensing COVID-19 oral antivirals without a prescription or prescribing these medicines as
pharmaceutical benefits. The National Health Act 1953 and subordinate legislation do not
authorise pharmacists to prescribe pharmaceutical benefits that are eligible for PBS
subsidies.

The Australian Government notes the recommendation to review the framework for
access to antiviral treatments for COVID-19.

The PBAC’s approach to economic evaluation uses the health care system perspective,
which includes health and health-related resource use (costs and cost offsets), and health-
related outcomes. However, the PBAC guidelines advise that a broader societal perspective
may be considered where justified. The guidelines advise that an economic evaluation that
incorporates considerations beyond the patient and the health care system may be
presented in supplementary material, where the proposed intervention has important
societal implications extending beyond the health outcomes of the patient receiving the
medicine, and beyond the health care system. For example, costs or savings or socially
relevant outcomes in domains such as education, housing or justice, or economic
productivity impacts.

A Health Technology Assessment (HTA) policy and methods review is currently underway in
which the PBAC process is being examined to understand how it can be more responsive
and efficient.

13

Recommendation 6

7.13 The aim of the Committee is to ensure people get the support they need, most of
which will occur via the primary care network. Accordingly, the Committee makes the
following recommendations regarding management:

e Support and education should be provided to general practitioners (GPs) as well as other
primary healthcare providers to diagnose long COVID and to help manage those suffering
from it. Education for GPs should be coordinated and eligible for Continuing Professional
Development (CPD). The Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) chronic disease management
item number should be reviewed
Clinical care should be linked to nationally coordinated research and data collection
Funding be provided in partnership with state health departments for selected public
hospitals to develop multidisciplinary long COVID clinics linked to nationally consistent
referral guidelines for screening patients with challenging long COVID complications
Mental health support for those with long COVID must be provided in an affordable,
timely and equitable manner, and regular review of mental health issues should be part of
GP management noting that the extent of related mental health impacts is still unknown
Telehealth and digital health resources be leveraged to make self-management and access
to primary care easier
Funding be provided so that outreach long COVID clinics can be developed for rural and
regional areas, accessible either face to face or via telehealth, as a GP resource.

The Australian Government agrees that the majority of supports for people with long
COVID will occur via the primary care network.

The Australian Government notes the recommendation to provide educational supports
to general practitioners and other primary healthcare providers, and for this to be made
eligible for Continuing Professional Development.

The Government remains committed to ensuring support and education is provided for
primary healthcare providers, including GPs, for appropriate diagnosis and management of
PASC. As per Recommendation 2, the Government previously engaged the RACGP to
develop a health practitioner guideline ‘Caring for patients with post-COVID-19 conditions’
and a consumer resource ‘Managing post-COVID-19 symptoms’, both published in 2021.

Continuing Professional Development (CPD) requirements for medical doctors are
determined by the Medical Board of Australia, medical colleges or accredited CPD Homes.
These are not Commonwealth government organisations.

14

The Australian Government supports review of the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS),
and as part of this, items for treatment of chronic conditions.

The Strengthening Medicare Taskforce was established in July 2022 to improve primary
health care for all Australians and ensure that future health care needs can be met.
Stemming from the Strengthening Medicare Taskforce Report, published on 3 February
2023, significant reforms have already been announced ($6.1 billion over 5 years in the
2023-2024 Budget).

These reforms will have implications for chronic disease management, which includes the
management of many people with PASC. In particular, the introduction of MyMedicare will
support the continuity of care and improve access to telehealth for patients registered with
their local GP. Changes from 1 November 2024, including an increase to the rebate for
reviews of chronic disease management plans by GPs, should encourage more regular
patient management and treatment reviews.

The Australian Government supports the recommendation to link clinical care to
nationally coordinated research and data collection.

In recognition of the importance of translating evidence to clinical practice, the MRFF has
announced a new $50 million MRFF research initiative to drive innovation in primary health.
Priority groups for research include people with complex chronic conditions.

Research projects are expected to be funded from July 2024. Funding will be targeted to
research focused on identifying and evaluating models of primary care including:
e team-based care;
e the application of research findings in primary care settings and disseminating
knowledge to improve person-centred care; and
e better use of data and digital technologies to evaluate models and support health
system planning.

The Australian Government notes the recommendation to fund multidisciplinary long
COVID clinics.

Through the National Health Reform Agreement (NHRA), the Government provides a
Significant funding contribution to states and territories to assist with the cost of delivering
public health and hospital services. Under the current agreement, it is at the discretion of
states and territories to determine how this funding is allocated. Some jurisdictions may use
this funding to establish multidisciplinary clinics for PASC management.

Most people with PASC will be effectively treated through existing multidisciplinary primary
care services. For those with complex presentations, more intensive multidisciplinary or
specialist care may be required. As described above, the Government has previously
engaged the RACGP to develop both healthcare provider and consumer resources.

The Australian Government supports the recommendation to provide mental health
supports for people with long COVID.

15

Noting mental health is not exclusively a PASC issue, a number of mental health supports
are currently available to those impacted by COVID-19. These include Medicare-subsidised
psychological services through the MBS Better Access Initiative, access to telehealth
arrangements, a range of online and digital supports and access to mental health support
through MBS chronic disease management items. In recognition of the need to improve
access to mental health support, the Government announced the following commitments in
the

2023-24 Budget:

e $79.4 million over 4 years from 2023-24 to support Primary Health Networks (PHNs)
to commission allied health services to improve access to multidisciplinary care for
people with chronic conditions in underserviced communities.

e $8.7 million in 2023-24 to continue the current service capacity of digital mental
health services and to maintain the national Head to Health website.

e §260.2 million over two years to ensure continuity of psychosocial supports for
people with mental illness. .

e $91.3 million over five years to address critical shortages in the workforce for
services in psychology.

The Government’s commitment to strengthening Medicare will also improve access to
mental health services. The implementation of MyMedicare will enable multidisciplinary
teams to deliver tailored care to patients with complex health needs and support increased
access to care for all Australians. i

The Government has also committed to further mental health reform, including in response
to the Better Access evaluation. This will include considering a new model for digital services
for mental health services, to ensure digital services, including clinician-supported online
services, are appropriately embedded within the mental health service system.

The national Head to Health program (inclusive of the face-to-face centres, the phone
service and the website) offers free information, programs and services to all Australians
seeking support with their mental health and wellbeing. The national Head to Health
program is positioned to offer support to people suffering from PASC through the mental
health supports on offer and being managed via the face-to-face, phone service and website
channels.

The Australian Government supports the recommendation to leverage telehealth and
digital health resources to improve access to primary care services.

The Government recognises the utility of digital health technologies in the treatment and
management of people with PASC. Telehealth services and other digital supports can enable
more complex care delivery, more innovative models of care and can support clinical
supervision and training.

16

To support the delivery of telehealth services, the Government has announced a
commitment of $5.9 million to support longer GP telehealth phone consultations for
MyMedicare registered patients, with reduced administration for practices.

The Australian Government notes the recommendation to fund outreach long COVID
clinics for rural and regional areas.

As described above, the Government provides significant funding to the state and territory
public health and hospital services through the NHRA. It is at the discretion of the
jurisdiction to determine where funds are allocated.

The Government recognises that most people with PASC can be managed through primary
health care services, but notes people in rural and regional areas may experience additional
barriers to accessing primary care due to a reduced number of health providers available
within their area.

In the 2023-24 Budget, the Government announced $3.5 billion to triple bulk billing
incentives, including scaled increases in the value of the incentives for regional, rural and
remote communities. Increases to incentives will cover both general face-to-face and
telehealth consultations, including home consultations for people who are homebound,
increasing the accessibility of primary care services.

The Government is committed to building medical workforce capability in rural and remote
settings, including by growing the number of GPs and rural generalists, increasing
opportunities and recognition for doctors to supplement their skills and broaden their scope
of practice, as detailed in the National Medical Workforce Strategy 2021-2023 (NMWS).

The NMWS also promotes digital health as a key enabler to new models of care and to
improve access to medical and other health care, particularly in rural and remote Australia.
The NMWS includes action to harness digital capabilities to support expanded scope of
practice for service delivery, for example through implementation of improved
computerised clinical decision support systems to assist generalists to practise safely with
an expanded scope in primary care settings.

17

Recommendation 7

7.14 The Committee recommends the Australian Government establish and fund a
multidisciplinary advisory body including ventilation experts, architects, aerosol scientists,
industry, building code regulators and public health experts to:

e Oversee an assessment of the impact of poor indoor air quality and ventilation on the
economy with particular consideration given to high-risk settings such as hospitals,
aged care facilities, childcare and educational settings.

e Lead the development of national indoor air quality standards for use in Australia.

The Australian Government notes the recommendation to establish and fund a
multidisciplinary advisory body to assess the impact of poor air quality and ventilation
and lead the development of national air quality standards.

The Government recognises the importance of good air quality and ventilation to human
health, including the flow on effects this may have on reducing the incidence of COVID-19.
In September 2022, the Government announced funding of a new NHMRC Centre for
Research Excellence, the Centre for Safe Air. The remit of the Centre for Safe Air
encompasses all sources of reduced air quality, indoor and outdoor, bringing together
experts, policy makers and consumers to create innovative solutions to protect community
health from airborne threats such as allergens, traffic emissions and smoke.

The Government has also requested that the Office of the Chief Scientist provide advice on
the mechanisms at play in the transmission of airborne diseases and areas to focus future
effort in improving indoor air quality standards. They will report on best practice and
opportunities for Australia to improve indoor air quality.

In addition, the AHPPC has tasked its Environmental Health Standing Committee (enHealth)
with further considering the health aspects of air quality and the development of practical
guidance for the general public.

The Australian Building Codes Board will monitor the above work and assess any proposed
changes to the National Construction Code for indoor air quality in new buildings. State and
territory governments are generally responsible for monitoring and regulating air quality in
their jurisdictions.

The Government notes that air quality in many high-risk settings is an aspect of work health
and safety (WHS), which is also regulated at the jurisdictional level. Australia has a robust
WHS framework based on the model WHS laws, which have been implemented in all
jurisdictions except Victoria. The model WHS laws require employers to eliminate, or
minimise so far as reasonably practicable, WHS risks in the workplace. This includes the risk
of exposure to biological hazards and airborne contaminants.

The Government is also in the process of developing a new Residential Aged Care
Accommodation Framework, including National Aged Care Design Principles and Guidelines.
The Design Principles and Guidelines will provide a comprehensive, evidence-based

18

resource to promote the design of aged care accommodation and support the delivery of
high quality, safe, respectful and dignified care. From 1 July 2024, the Design Principles and
Guidelines will also consider clinical supports and safety features, including infection
prevention and control measures and clean air.

19

Recommendation 8

7.15 The Committee recommends funding be made available for Myalgic
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS) research and patient support and that

this funding should be allocated in consultation with peak bodies for ME/CFS and with note of
the recommendations of the ME/CFS Advisory Committee’s 2019 report to the National
Health and Medical Research Council.

The Australian Government supports in-principle the recommendation to support Myalgic
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS) research and patient supports.

The Government recognises the challenges faced by individuals with ME/CFS in accessing
support, including through primary care. This issue was also identified by the Strengthening
Medicare Taskforce.

People with ME/CFS are currently able to access support through time-tiered GP general
attendance items and MBS chronic disease management items. People with ME/CFS will
also likely benefit from recent reforms to primary care that enable care to be delivered in
more tailored and efficient ways to better address patient needs.

The Government is providing $880,000 under Program 1.5 Preventive Health and Chronic
Disease Support over four years (2022-23 to 2025-26) to Emerge Australia, a patient-
focused organisation for Australians living with ME/CFS. The funding will assist in improving
support services provided to Australians living with ME/CFS through the provision of a
nurse-led patient information and support service, resource development, advocacy, and
the facilitation of community support groups, including online support.

Additionally, the Government has previously provided $3.3 million through the NHMRC’s
Targeted Calls for Research scheme and $1.27 million through Ideas Grants to fund four
projects to better understand the causes and disease processes of ME/CFS to improve its
diagnosis, management and treatment.

20

Recommendation 9

7.16 The Committee recommends, given the multiple questions that have arisen during our

Inquiry, that the Australian Government consider a comprehensive summit into the COVID-19
pandemic and Australia’s past and current response, including by governments at all levels,
with particular consideration to the role of the future Centre for Disease Control.

The Australian Government supports in-principle the recommendation to review
Australia’s COVID-19 pandemic response.

On the 21 September 2023, the Prime Minister announced a Commonwealth Government
COVID-19 Response Inquiry (the Inquiry). The Inquiry’s Terms of Reference can be found at:
WWw.pmc.gov.au/resources/commonwealth-government-covid-19-response-inquir
reference.

The Inquiry’s recommendations will contribute to other pandemic preparedness work,
including the development of the Australian CDC.

21

-
