Australian Government response to the
Environment and Communications References
Committee report:
Impacts and management of feral horses in the
Australian Alps
February 2024
Introduction
The Australian Government thanks the Environment and Communications References
Committee for its report on the Impacts and management of feral horses in the Australian
Alps, and those who contributed to the inquiry. We particularly acknowledge First Nations
people who made submissions for the protection of the Australian Alps and First Nations
heritage values.
Feral horses are causing enormous damage to the Australian Alps National Parks and
Reserves National Heritage place – an environment that is equally unique and fragile. Feral
horses threaten with extinction imperilled plants, animals and unique ecological communities
that are protected under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
(EPBC Act), and that are of cultural and spiritual value to First Nations people. Decisive
action is needed to avert the extinction of these plants and animals and to ensure they can
recover and prosper. This is no small task and will require all parties with management
responsibility for the Australian Alps to work together and to act now.
To support this response, the Australian Government is prioritising improved protection
through strengthened collaboration with New South Wales, Victoria and the Australian
Capital Territory – the primary land managers of the Australian Alps. This includes working
through the recently re-established Australian Alps Ministerial Council. Recognising the
Australian Alps as priority place under the Threatened Species Action Plan 2022-2032, the
Australian Government will provide additional funding to protect and recover threatened
alpine species and ecological communities impacted by feral horses.
This response has been prepared in the context of ongoing consultation and work to reform
national environmental law – the EPBC Act. The Nature Positive Plan (see
https://www.dcceew.gov.au/environment/epbc/publications/nature-positive-plan) outlines the
Australian Government’s commitment to strengthen and streamline Australia’s
environmental laws in response to the Independent Review of the EPBC Act (see
https://epbcactreview.environment.gov.au), undertaken by Professor Graeme Samuel AC
(the Samuel Review). National Environmental Standards are the centrepiece of the reforms.
The Standards will improve environmental protections and guide decision making, including
matters of national environment significance (MNES) such as the Australian Alps National
Heritage place, its internationally important wetlands, and nationally threatened species and
ecological communities.
The Australian Government has engaged with the governments of NSW, Victoria and the
ACT and their relevant National Park management agencies in considering responses to the
recommendations of the report. The Australian Alps Ministerial Council met on 10 November
2023 and noted the recommendations of the inquiry (see
https://www.dcceew.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/australian-alps-ministerial-council-
communique-10-nov-2023.pdf).
1
Responses
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the
Environment and Water, in collaboration with its state and territory counterparts,
undertake an impact and population assessment of feral horses at the national level.
Response
NOTED
Impact and population assessments of feral horses are best conducted by relevant states
and territories to ensure assessments are adapted to local priorities and procedures for feral
species control.
A single, national impact and population assessment of feral horses would not be feasible or
effective. Instead, we will work strategically with our state and territory counterparts to build
our understanding of the impacts to MNES, including the National Heritage place and
susceptible threatened species at risk from feral horses, and take action at the appropriate
time and scale.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that the Minister for Environment and Water list habitat
degradation, competition and disease transmission by feral horses as a Key Threatening
Process under the Environment Biodiversity and Conservation Act 1999.
Response
AGREED IN PRINCIPLE
Listing a Key Threatening Process (KTP) under the EPBC Act requires that the process be
formally prioritised and assessed against prescribed criteria by the Threatened Species
Scientific Committee (TSSC).
The Minister for the Environment and Water invites public nominations for potential listing of
key threatening processes under the EPBC Act each year. Eligible nominations are
considered by the TSSC, and if prioritised are provided to the Minister for decision whether
the TSSC undertakes a full assessment involving public and expert input. If a nomination
does undergo a full assessment by the TSSC, the assessment is provided to the Minister for
final decision on whether the process is listed as a Key Threatening Process under the
EPBC Act.
The Minister for the Environment and Water will write to the Chair of the Threatened Species
Scientific Committee requesting that ‘habitat degradation, competition and disease
transmission by feral horses’ is prioritised for its consideration.
2
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that, after the Key Threatening Process is in place, the
Minister for the Environment issue a Threat Abatement Plan as soon as is practicable, in
order to reduce the threat of feral horses in the Australian Alps.
Response
NOTED
The recommendation for the Minister for the Environment to issue a Threat Abatement Plan
is contingent on the process outlined in the response to Recommendation 2 above, and
further statutory decisions and processes set out in Part 13 of the EPBC Act.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that in partnership with the states and territory, the Murray-
Darling Basin Authority undertake work to measure, monitor and record the quality of
Basin water resources in and flowing from the Australian Alps, with particular reference to
the impact of feral horses.
Response
NOTED
The Murray-Darling Basin Authority (MDBA) notes this recommendation. The MDBA notes
that water flowing from the Australian Alps flows into the Murray-Darling Basin and other
catchments outside the Basin such as the Snowy River.
Water quality monitoring in each of the Murray-Darling Basin jurisdictions is carried out by
the relevant state or territory. Under existing programs managed by the MDBA, state
agencies monitor several water quality parameters at two monitoring stations upstream of
Hume Dam located at Jingellic and Tallandoon. However, these parameters are not suited to
isolating specific impacts of feral horses on the quality of water flowing from the Australian
Alps.
The MDBA does not have the capacity, resources, and remit to undertake water quality
monitoring to identify the impacts of feral horses on the quality of water flowing from the
Australian Alps. Noting that water quality outcomes directly overlap with and exacerbate
impacts to matters of national environmental significance (such as threatened species
habitat), the MDBA will consult states and the territory on developing a work program to
better understand the impacts of feral horses. Any implementation would be by the states
and the territory.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends that in partnership with the states and territory, the Murray-
Darling Basin Authority undertake an immediate assessment of the condition of the
catchment of the Hume Reservoir, with particular reference to the impact of feral horses.
Response
AGREED IN PRINCIPLE
3
The Murray-Darling Basin Authority (MDBA) supports this recommendation in principle.
As provided in Clause 51 of the Murray-Darling Basin Agreement, taking measures to
protect Hume Reservoir’s catchment within each state is a responsibility of the respective
state. This requirement is focussed on protecting the catchment from excessive erosion.
The MDBA will seek the agreement of states and the territory to identify opportunities within
existing catchment monitoring programs to better understand the impact of feral horses on
erosion.
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government take a lead role to achieve
cooperation between state and territory governments in the formulation of management
plans for National Heritage listed places, including in the Australian Alps National Heritage
place. The Australian Government should establish agreed mechanisms to resolve
disputes between jurisdictions to ensure that National Heritage values are being
protected.
Response
AGREED
The Australian Government will take a lead role in seeking cooperation between the NSW,
Victorian and ACT governments to encourage consistent and complementary management
plans for the entire Australian Alps National Parks and Reserves National Heritage place.
Minister Plibersek has re-established the Australian Alps Ministerial Council, which now
provides an ongoing forum for relevant ministers to raise and resolve disputes.
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommends that the EPBC Regulations, which set out the management
principles for National Heritage listed places, be amended to include reference to
international obligations.
Response
NOTED
The Australian Government notes this recommendation in the context of ongoing
consultation and work to reform the EPBC Act.
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends that the National Heritage provisions of the EPBC Act be
amended to include that regard must be given towards Target 6 as adopted in the
Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework.
Response
NOTED
4
The Australian Government notes this recommendation in the context of ongoing
consultation and work to reform the EPBC Act.
Recommendation 9
9a The Committee recommends that the Australian Government commission urgent
monitoring to assess the current status of EPBC Act-listed species, ecological
communities and migratory species in the Australian Alps.
9b Further, the Australian Government should work with the NSW, Victorian and ACT
governments to urgently implement recovery plans to better protect critically endangered
species such as the Stocky Galaxias and Southern Corroboree Frog.
Response
9a AGREED
The Australian Government will continue to provide support to the NSW, Victorian and ACT
governments to monitor the status of EPBC listed species. This includes:
• continuing collaboration on assessment of species for potential listing as threatened
species under the EPBC Act. There are currently 11 species and one ecological
community found in the Australian Alps that are under assessment. Assessment
includes consideration of extinction risk with regard to changes in population sizes,
geographic distribution and number of mature individuals. Nominations are called
annually for prioritisation of new assessments of species and ecological communities
considered to be at potential extinction risk.
• monitoring of species and ecological communities that have been assessed as at risk
of extinction and listed as threatened under the EPBC Act will be supported through
new Australian Government funded projects in the Australian Alps.
The Australian Alps Ministerial Council has agreed to pursue a coordinated and strategic
approach to managing, protecting and enhancing the unique biodiversity, cultural and
heritage values of the Australian Alps. This will include addressing threats associated with
climate change and invasive species, and implementation of conservation planning for
threatened species. The Australian Alps Ministerial Council will provide a forum for the NSW,
Victorian and ACT governments to report on results from their monitoring.
9b AGREED
The Australian Government agrees to continue to work in partnership with the NSW,
Victorian and ACT governments to implement recovery plans to better protect critically
endangered species such as the Stocky Galaxias and Southern Corroboree Frog.
5
Recommendation 10
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government increase funding to the
states and territory, who are the primary land managers of the Australian Alps National
Parks and Reserves, to enable them to ensure National Heritage values are upheld and
threatened species are protected from extinction.
Response
AGREED
The Australian Government will provide additional funding for threatened species recovery in
the Australian Alps to NSW, Victoria and the ACT. These new funds will build on significant
Australian Government investments for the recovery of threatened species and ecological
communities made in recent years.
Recommendation 11
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government expand its partnership with
FeralScan to develop a platform for the monitoring and logging of feral horses.
Response
AGREED IN PRINCIPLE
FeralScan is hosted by the Centre for Invasive Species Solutions (CISS) and is funded by
CISS members, including significant investment by the Australian Government.
FeralScan is a community pest animal reporting and management tool that allows users to
record pest animal activity to protect farms, biodiversity and communities. It covers multiple
species including feral donkeys. The Department of Climate Change, Energy, the
Environment and Water will investigate whether CISS is able to include feral horses in
FeralScan.
Recommendation 12
The Committee recommends that the NSW Government update the Kosciuszko National
Park Wild Horse Heritage Management Plan to allow the use of aerial shooting as one of
the available feral horse control methods if deemed appropriate under strict safety,
scientific and humane practices.
Response
NOTED
This recommendation is addressed to the NSW Government. The NSW Government
adopted an amendment to the Kosciuszko National Park Wild Horse Heritage Management
Plan on 27 October 2023 to allow the use of aerial shooting.
At the meeting of the Australian Alps Ministerial Council on 10 November 2023 the
Australian, NSW, Victorian and ACT Ministers welcomed the NSW announcement on
6
27 October 2023 that it has adopted an amendment to the 2021 Kosciuszko National Park
Wild Horse Heritage Management Plan for reducing the number of feral horses in the park.
The amendment allows the NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service to use aerial shooting
in addition to existing control methods such as trapping, rehoming, and ground shooting (see
AAMC Communiqué https://www.dcceew.gov.au/sites/default/files/documents/australian-
alps-ministerial-council-communique-10-nov-2023.pdf).
Recommendation 13
The Committee recommends that the Australian Alps Liaison Committee membership
include Indigenous representation, to ensure that Indigenous knowledge and culture is
properly considered at each stage of its processes.
Response
AGREED IN PRINCIPLE
It is important that appropriate ways for the views of First Nations people to be represented
in the Australian Alps National Parks Cooperative Management Program be determined in
cooperation with First Nations people.
The Australian Government will approach the NSW, Victorian and ACT governments about
the proposal for the Australian Alps Liaison Committee membership to include
representation from First Nations people. The Australian Government notes that First
Nations peoples involvement is a priority in the 2023-2026 Australian Alps Strategic Plan
(see https://theaustralianalpsnationalparks.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/V-04-08-2022-
Final-Draft-Word-strategic-plan-2023-2026-for-the-australian-alps-national-parks-co-
operative-management-program.pdf).
Recommendation 14
The Committee recommends that the NSW, Victoria and ACT Governments urgently
review the safety of staff working in and around national parks, and work with local law
enforcement agencies to ensure that staff are properly protected in their workplaces.
Response
NOTED
This recommendation is addressed to the NSW, Victorian and ACT governments. The
Australian Government considers the safety of staff working in and around national parks in
the Australian Alps, and elsewhere in the country, to be paramount. In their submissions to
the Committee inquiry all three jurisdictions expressed their strong commitment to staff
safety.
7
Coalition Senators’ Dissenting Recommendations
Dissenting recommendation 1
Further studies, including longitudinal studies, be undertaken using an agreed method of
collection across three time periods to meet the requirements of complex statistical
modelling techniques.
Response
NOT AGREED
The Australian Government considers that the methodology for surveys is best determined
by the place managers for the Australian Alps, being the NSW, Victorian and ACT parks
management agencies. Through the Australian Alps Ministerial Council and Australian Alps
Liaison Committee the Australian Government will continue to engage with NSW, Victorian
and ACT park management agencies on the implementation and outcomes of population
studies of feral horses in the Australian Alps.
Dissenting recommendation 2
Further studies be undertaken on alternative options to contribute to the control and
reduction of Australian brumby populations.
Response
NOT AGREED
The Australian Government considers that the control and reduction of feral horses is best
determined by the place managers for the Australian Alps, being the NSW, Victorian and
ACT parks management agencies and is satisfied that a suitable range of options to
contribute to the control and reduction of feral horses in the Australian Alps are being used
by them. Through the Australian Alps Ministerial Council and Australian Alps Liaison
Committee, the Australian Government will continue to engage with NSW, Victorian and
ACT park management agencies on the options for the control of feral horses in the
Australian Alps.
Dissenting recommendation 3
Impact evaluation studies be conducted on the impact, both positive and negative, of
Australian brumbies in the Australian Alps instead of focusing on the raw numbers.
Response
NOT AGREED
The Australian Government’s focus, as set out under the EPBC Act, relates to impacts on
Matters of National Environmental Significance (MNES). The impact of feral horses on
MNES in the Australian Alps is well evidenced and will remain our focus.
8
Dissenting recommendation 4
Study on population of Australian brumbies be undertaken using reliable methodology with
a higher rate of accuracy with evaluations after 3 and 6 years.
Response
NOT AGREED
The Australian Government considers that the determination of reliable methodologies to
quantify feral horse numbers in the Australian Alps is primarily a matter for the NSW,
Victorian and ACT governments.
Dissenting recommendation 5
Federal funding options be considered for the use of drones to aid in the population
counts and the delivery of their management plans.
Response
NOT AGREED
The Australian Government considers that the determination of reliable methodologies to
quantify feral horse numbers in the Australian Alps is primarily a matter for the NSW,
Victorian and ACT governments.
The Australian Government will provide additional funding to NSW, Victoria and the ACT,
building on existing funding for management and recovery work in the Australian Alps, as
noted above in response to Recommendation 10 of the majority recommendations.
Dissenting recommendation 6
Greater investment in developing and refining humane non-lethal methods for the
reduction of numbers of Australian brumbies.
Response
NOT AGREED
The Australian Government considers that reliable and humane lethal methods for the
reduction in numbers of feral horses in the Australian Alps are required given the
exceedingly high numbers of horses and the impact they are having on MNES.
9
Dissenting recommendation 7
Support be given to the current NSW policy for number reduction as outlined in the
Kosciuszko National Park Wild Horse Heritage Management Plan.
Response
AGREED IN PART
The Australian Government supports the NSW Government policy to reduce the total
population of feral horses across the feral horse retention management areas to 3000
horses by 30 June 2027. Should this be insufficient to avoid further irreversible damage to
Matters of National Environmental Significance (MNES) and the Australian Alps, the
Australian Government would seek the further reduction of horse numbers and support a
zero-tolerance approach, such as that currently employed by the ACT.
Dissenting recommendation 8
The Federal Government should offer the NSW Government additional funding to support
control methods, provided they do not take up aerial culling.
Response
AGREED IN PART
The Australian Government has provided the NSW government with an additional $200,000
for feral horse control in June 2023, adding to $1.1 million provided for feral horse control
following the Black Summer bushfires. Future Australian Government funding for feral horse
control in the Australian Alps will be contingent on the relevant state or territory having lethal
horse control as a management option.
Dissenting recommendation 9
Legal advice be sought regarding Commonwealth regulation-making powers and related
constitutional matters under the EPBC Act.
Response
NOTED
The Australian Government notes that legal advice was sought and received on this matter
by the previous Government.
The Minister for the Environment and Water has not released the legal advice consistent
with the long-standing practice of successive Australian Governments not to disclose legal
advice.
10
Additional Recommendations from Senator David Pocock
Additional recommendation 1
The NSW Government should urgently repeal the Kosciuszko Wild Horse Heritage Act
2018, which has been identified as presenting the biggest threat to the Australian Alps.
Response
NOTED
This recommendation is directed to the NSW Government.
Additional recommendation 2
The NSW and Victorian governments should adopt the ACT Government’s zero-tolerance
approach to feral horse management, to ensure that the Australian Alps are not further
destroyed by feral horses.
Response
NOTED
This recommendation is directed to the NSW and Victorian governments.
Additional recommendation 3
The Australian Government should provide immediate and ongoing funding to the ACT
Government in order to allow the work of feral horse monitoring and management to
continue, for as long feral horses persist in Kosciuszko National Park.
Response
AGREED IN PART
The Australian Government will provide new funding to the ACT Government for the
recovery of threatened species and ecological communities in the Australian Alps. Funds will
be provided on a project (non-ongoing) basis and will include monitoring of the recovery of
MNES. It is yet to be determined if these funds will include monitoring of feral horse
incursions or impacts of feral horses to MNES.
Additional recommendation 4
Section 523 of the EPBC Act should be amended to add "the failure to act", as a definition
of ‘action’, where the result of that failure is likely or be known to have a significant impact
on a matter of national environment significant.
Response
NOTED
The Australian Government notes this recommendation in the context of ongoing
discussions and work to reform the EPBC Act.
11
