
Terminology used in this response
Term Description
ALRC Australian Law Reform Commission
ALRC Report ALRC Report 135: Family Law for the Future – An Inquiry into
the Family Law System, March 2019
Child Abduction Family Law (Child Abduction Convention) Regulations 1986
Regulations
Committee Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee
Family Law Act Family Law Act 1975 (Cth)
FCFCOA Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
FCFCOA Act Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021 (Cth)
Hague Convention 1980 Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International
Child Abduction
Government The Commonwealth Government of Australia
ICL Independent Children’s Lawyer
2
Introduction
The Australian Government (the Government) welcomes the opportunity to respond to the
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee report: Family Law
Amendment Bill 2023 [Provisions] (Committee report) tabled on 24 August 2023. The
Family Law Amendment Act 2023 (the Amendment Act) received Royal Assent on
6 November 2023.
The Amendment Act addresses numerous child-related recommendations from the Australian
Law Reform Commission’s 2019 Report, Family Law for the Future: An inquiry into the
Family Law System (the ALRC Report) and the 2021 Joint Select Committee on Australia’s
Family Law System. The Amendment Act demonstrates the Government’s commitment to
making Australia’s family law system simpler, safer and more accessible for separating
families and their children.
The Committee concluded that stakeholders supported the objectives of the Bill and
recommended the Bill be passed, subject to further consideration of nine recommendations.
The Government agreed with all nine of the Committee’s recommendations in whole or in
principle, and moved Government amendments to the Bill in response to seven of these
recommendations, including:
• amending the ‘best interests’ factors to ensure the history of family violence, abuse
and neglect are considered when determining the arrangements that would promote
the safety of the child and their caregivers
• giving greater clarity to the stand-alone best interests factor for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander children, and the operation of the revised definitions of ‘relative’ and
‘member of the family’
• amendments to enable the removal of the higher threshold requirement for
consideration of a child’s objections to a return order in Hague Convention cases
• including a requirement for a statutory review to occur three years after the changes to
the Family Law Act 1975 (Cth) (Family Law Act) commence
• amending application provisions to ensure that the changes apply to all existing court
matters on commencement, excluding those where a final hearing has commenced,
and
• removing costs provisions specific to contravention proceedings to avoid duplication
of the court’s discretionary powers to award costs in family law matters.
The Committee made two further recommendations to Government. The first was to
undertake an education and awareness campaign on the Bill. The second was to develop
appropriate protections in relation to the use of sensitive information (‘protected
confidences’) in family law proceedings. Further work on these matters is being progressed
by the Attorney-General’s Department.
The Government thanks the members of the Committee for their work, and all the individuals
and organisations that engaged with the Committee’s inquiry by providing submissions and
attending the public hearing held in Canberra on 11 August 2023. The Government’s
response to the report is set out below.
3
Response to Committee Recommendations
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the Australian government amends item 6 in Part 1 of
Schedule 1 of the Bill to:
• include a history of family violence, abuse and neglect as a general consideration in
determining what is in the child’s best interests; and
• incorporate the language and concepts from subsection 60CC(6) of the Family Law Act
1975, to better recognise and protect the right of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
children to enjoy their culture
Agreed.
The Government implemented the first part of Recommendation 1 by including new
subsection 60CC(2A) in section 60CC (item 6 of the Bill). This amendment makes the
relevance of past family violence, abuse and neglect in determining future parenting
arrangements clear to all users of the Family Law Act, and provides an additional safeguard
to ensure these matters are considered by the court.
This new subsection specifies that in determining the arrangements that would promote the
safety of the child and their caregivers, the court must consider the history of family violence,
abuse and neglect involving the child or a person who was caring for the child; and any
family violence order that applies or has applied to the child or a member of the child’s
family.
The second part of Recommendation 1 was implemented by making a further amendment to
subsection 60CC(3) (item 6 of the Bill). Subsection 60CC(3) provides a standalone ‘best
interests’ factor requiring a court to consider the right of Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
children to enjoy their culture.
The subsection was amended to include an additional requirement for the court, when
determining what is in an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander child’s best interests, to
consider whether that child will have the support, opportunity and encouragement necessary
to explore the full extent of their culture, consistent with the child’s age, developmental level
and views. This amendment reflects existing wording in the Family Law Act and responds to
the feedback from stakeholders that retaining these additional requirements will ensure
proper consideration of an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander child’s cultural rights.
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that all substantive amendments commence in six months time
beginning on the day the Bill receives Royal Assent, and apply to all matters which have not
yet commenced a final hearing.
Agreed.
The Government made changes to certain application provisions within Schedules 1, 3, 4 and
5 to ensure that the changes apply to all existing court matters on commencement of the
Schedules, excluding those where a final hearing has commenced.
4
These amendments addressed the Committee’s concerns that applying different law to
matters in the court system, depending on their date of filing, would be confusing for litigants
and legal practitioners.
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the Australian government removes proposed section
70NBE from the Bill to avoid duplication of the court’s discretionary power to award costs in
family law matters.
Agreed.
The Government amended the Bill to remove proposed section 70NBE (Cost orders).
Section 117 of the Family Law Act already provides the court with a discretionary power to
award costs in circumstances that justify the making of a costs order. Removing the costs
provisions from Division 13A supported the overarching intention of the Bill to streamline
key sections of the Family Law Act to make them simpler for users of the legislation to
understand and apply.
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the Australian government amends items 2 and 4 in
Schedule 3 of the Bill to incorporate the concepts of kinship and child-rearing practices
contained in section 61F of the Family Law Act 1975.
Agreed in principle.
The Government amended items 2 and 4 of the Bill to include specific reference to ‘kinship
systems’ in the amendments to the definitions of ‘relative of a child’ and ‘relative of a
person’ which applies to the definition of ‘member of the family’. Under these amendments,
the relatives and members of the family of an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander child can
include any person who is related to them in accordance with their Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander culture including, but not limited to, any kinship systems of that culture. The
inclusion of the term ‘kinship system’ recognises that concepts of kinship are familiar to
many Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander communities. Under this amendment, an
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander child’s family will still be determined with reference to
that child’s Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander culture.
The Government did not amend the Bill to include reference to ‘child rearing practices’
because this is a reference to the process of bringing up a child or children and not a manner
in which family members can be identified.
5
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends that the Australian government amends the Bill to ensure that
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are not subject to more onerous disclosure
obligations as a result of the expanded definitions of ‘member of the family’ and ‘relative’ in
the Bill.
Agreed.
The Government amended the Bill with the effect that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people will not be subject to more onerous disclosure obligations under sections 60CF, 60CH
and 60CI of the Family Law Act as a result of the expanded definitions of ‘member of the
family’ and ‘relative’. Specifically, it is specified that the expanded part of the definition of
‘member of the family’ in subsection 4(1AB), which is expanded through the application of
an expanded part of the definition of relative of a person in subsection 4(1AD), does not
apply to the obligations in sections 60CF, 60CH and 60CI. The court notification obligations
will however continue to apply in relation to members of an Aboriginal or Torres Strait
Islander child’s family as defined in subsection 4(1AB) excluding the expanded component.
The amendments to the Bill relate specifically to the disclosure obligations under sections
60CF, 60CH and 60CI of the Family Law Act because these obligations caused the most
concern amongst stakeholders and the definition of ‘member of the family’ in subsection
4(1AB) applies directly to these obligations.
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends that the Australian government repeals subsection 111B(1B) of
the Family Law Act 1975 and the ‘strength of feeling’ requirement in regulation 16(3)(c)(ii)
of the Family Law (Child Abduction Convention) Regulations 1986, to enable the objections
of the child to a return order to be taken into consideration under the Hague Convention on
the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction.
Agreed.
The Government agreed with the Committee’s recommendation to repeal
subsection 111B(1B) of the Family Law Act, which was implemented through the Family
Law Amendment Act 2023. The Government also agreed to repeal paragraph 16(3)(c)(ii) of
the Family Law (Child Abduction Convention) Regulations 1986 (the Child Abduction
Regulations) to align the implementation of the child’s objection exception with the wording
in the 1980 Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction (the
Hague Convention).
The amendment to the Family Law Act enables the Child Abduction Regulations to be
amended so that it is no longer necessary to show that a child’s objections are stronger than a
preference or ordinary wishes for them to be taken into account in return proceedings under
the Hague Convention. The amendments to the Child Abductions Regulations are being
progressed by the Attorney-General’s Department.
These changes will mean that, consistent with Article 13 of the Hague Convention, the court
may continue to refuse to order the return if the child objects to being returned and the child
6
is of an age and maturity where it is appropriate to take account of their views.
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends that the Attorney-General’s Department prioritises its advice to
the Attorney-General, to introduce safeguards against the disclosure of ‘protected
confidences’ in circumstances where there is no probative value for the disclosure.
Agreed.
Following consultation on the exposure draft of the Bill, Schedule 6 containing the proposed
‘protected confidences’ measure was removed from the Bill prior to its introduction into the
House of Representatives. While there was strong stakeholder support for the policy intent of
the measure, there were a broad range of stakeholder views on the effectiveness of the
proposed measure.
The Government acknowledges that safeguarding protected confidences remains a significant
issue for stakeholders and agrees with the Committee’s recommendation that advice be
prioritised to the Attorney-General to introduce safeguards against the disclosure of
‘protected confidences’ in circumstances where there is no probative value for the disclosure.
The Attorney-General’s Department is conducting further analysis and consultation on
safeguarding protected confidences as a matter of priority, including through seeking further
stakeholder views in public consultation on the Family Law Amendment Bill (No. 2) 2023.
Recommendation 8
The committee recommends that the Australian government delivers an awareness and
education campaign to ensure that the repeal of the presumption of equal shared parental
responsibility and the primacy of the child’s best interests are well understood by separating
families.
Agreed.
The Government will provide information to family law professionals and separating families
on the removal of the presumption of equal shared parental responsibility and the new factors
that a court will consider when deciding parenting arrangements. The Attorney-General’s
Department has published initial factsheets for parents and family law professionals on its
website, and will develop a more expansive and tailored range of education materials for
publication prior to the commencement of changes to the parenting framework on
6 May 2023.
Recommendation 9
The committee recommends that the Bill is amended to provide for a review of the operation
of the Act, in conjunction with a review of the operation of the Family Law Amendment
(Information Sharing) Bill 2023.
Agreed.
7
The Government amended the Bill to provide for a review of the operation of the
Amendment Act, in conjunction with a review of the operation of the Family Law
Amendment (Information Sharing) Act 2023.
A new schedule was added to the Amendment Act that provided for a statutory review of
Schedules 1-7. The review must be arranged by the Minister as soon as practicable after the
third anniversary of the day that Schedule 1 of the Amendment Act commences. In
recognition of the importance of the timely completion of this review, the review must be
finalised within twelve months. The amendment also included a requirement for the report of
the review to be tabled in Parliament.
The review is to ensure the new provisions are operating as intended. The review does not
relate to Schedules 8 and 9 of the Amendment Act, as those amendments relate to, or fall
within, the review of the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021 (FCFCOA
Act).
8
Response to Senator Scarr’s Recommendations
Recommendation 1
The objects and principles within the current section 60B be retained.
Not agreed.
The Government does not agree with retaining the current objects and principles provision.
The ALRC Report recommended full repeal of the objects provision. The Government
considers, however, that simplification of the objects provision will achieve the aims of the
ALRC recommendation by eliminating confusion about the interaction of section 60B and
section 60CC.
The Government agrees with the Committee’s view that new section 60B is simpler than the
previous provision and is consistent with other provisions in the Family Law Act.
Recommendation 2
That the term: ‘neglect’ used in paragraph 60CC(2)(a) be defined in the Bill in accordance
with the recommendation of the Law Council of Australia.
Not agreed.
The Government considers that the Bill’s Explanatory Memorandum provides adequate
guidance on interpretation of the term ‘neglect’. ‘Neglect’ is not defined in the Family Law
Act. However, the Amendment Act adopts the position of the Explanatory Memorandum to
the Family Law Amendment (Shared Parental Responsibility) Act 2006, which inserted the
term.
It is explained in the Explanatory Memorandum that, consistent with this, the term ‘neglect’
within the Family Law Act should be applied by reference to its meaning or understanding in
accordance with state and territory child protection legislation. Further, it is intended to be
limited to situations where a lack of reasonable care is likely to cause unnecessary suffering
or injury to the health of the child.
Recommendation 3
That paragraph 60CC(2)(b) be amended by retaining the existing words within paragraph
60CC(3)(a) in accordance with the recommendation of the Law Council of Australia.
Not agreed.
The Government considers that this recommendation is not consistent with the Bill’s
objective of simplification of section 60CC. New paragraph 60CC(2)(b) provides that the
court must consider any views expressed by the child. This simplifies previous paragraph
60CC(3)(a) which also required the court to consider any factors (such as the child’s maturity
or level of understanding) that the court thought relevant to the weight it should give to the
9
child’s views. The requirement to consider any views expressed by the child recognises
children’s agency and their right to be heard in proceedings that affect them.
As with all of the general considerations in subsection 60CC(2), the court will have discretion
to consider those views in light of the child’s particular circumstances and determine how
much weight to place on them.
Recommendation 4
Proposed paragraph 60CC(2)(e) be amended by inserting the word: ‘meaningful’ before
relationship.
Not agreed.
The word ‘meaningful’ was not included in the best interests factors recommended by the
ALRC. The Amendment Act does not include this term to avoid potential confusion about its
meaning, for example, that ‘meaningful’ may be misinterpreted as referring to being
meaningful to the parent. Case law has attempted to clarify and define what a ‘meaningful
relationship’ means over time, however, the concern is that ambiguity and confusion remains,
particularly for self-represented litigants or parties who try to reach agreements outside of
court. Paragraph 60CC(2)(e) emphasises that the court is required to consider the benefit to
the child of their relationship with each parent, based on the particular circumstances of each
case.
Recommendation 5
It is recommended that the ALRC recommendation to replace the presumption of ‘equal
shared parental responsibility’ with a presumption of joint decision making about major long-
term issues be adopted and reflected in the drafting of the Bill.
Not agreed.
Replacing the presumption of ‘equal shared parental responsibility’ with a presumption of
joint decision making will not sufficiently address the range of concerns with the application
of the presumption in practice.
Stakeholders have noted that the presumption, in practice, detracted from a focus on the best
interests of the child. As the former President of the Law Council of Australia, Luke Murphy,
told the Committee:
“Presumptions unreasonably fetter the discretion of the court, and provisions around
parenting should not prioritise or favour any particular parenting arrangement, as is
currently the case. Parental responsibility should be a matter for the court to determine
in each case, if needed, having regard to the best interests of the child as the
paramount consideration1.”
1 Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee, 11 August 2023 Senate Committee Hearing
Hansard Transcript, page 2.
10
Reports by Australian Institute of Family Studies (AIFS) from 2015 and 2022 showed that
orders for shared parental responsibility were being made in the majority of litigated matters
and in the presence of safety concerns2. This was despite the legislation stating that the
presumption was not to be applied in cases of family violence and abuse of the child. This is
a strong indicator that the presumption was working to undermine the safety of children and
victims of family violence.
The Government notes that the Amendment Act does not alter the Family Law Act’s
fundamental position on parental responsibility – that is, that separated parents will continue
to each retain parental responsibility, which can be exercised jointly or separately, unless this
is varied by a court order (section 61C). Under this provision, each parent automatically has a
role in deciding what is reasonable in looking after a child, for example to authorise medical
treatment, except to the extent that a court orders otherwise.
The Amendment Act provides additional guidance to parents regarding consultation on major
long-term issues (new section 61CA) and the court’s powers to make orders that deal with the
allocation of responsibility for making decisions about major, long-term issues (section
61D(3)).
Recommendation 6
Schedule 2 be withdrawn from the Bill to enable further consideration and engagement with
the legal profession and then Schedule 2 (after appropriate revision) be reintroduced in a
subsequent Bill.
Not agreed.
The Government acknowledges the inherent complexity of Part VII, Division 13A, but
considers that the redraft strikes an appropriate balance between simplification of the
Division and ensuring that the underlying principles of the enforcement regime are
maintained.
In response to the feedback provided to the Committee, Government amendments were made
in the Senate to further improve the drafting of this Division, including clarifying the objects
clause and removing the proposed costs powers in section 70NBE.
Recommendation 7
The Attorney-General’s Department consider the Law Council of Australia’s
recommendations in relation to Schedule 4 and make appropriate amendments to the Bill.
Noted.
2 Australian Institute of Family Studies Submission to the Exposure Draft of the Family Law Amendment Bill
2023, February 2023 at p 5 referring to AIFS Court Outcomes Study, Kaspiew, Carson, Qu, et al., 2015, p. 57,
58 and 64) and AIFS Compliance with and Enforcement of Family Law Parenting Orders Project, Carson,
Kaspiew, Qu, et al., 2022, p.98).
11
All recommendations of the Law Council of Australia in relation to Schedule 4 of the Bill
concerning Independent Children’s Lawyers (ICLs) were considered. The Government
amended the Bill to specifically state that the ICL has the discretion to determine when, how
often and how meetings with the child take place, and when, how often and how the child is
provided with an opportunity to express a view, subject to any order or direction of the court
(subsection 68LA(5AA)). This responded to stakeholder feedback, including from the Law
Council of Australia, and ensures that the new legislative requirements for an ICL to meet
with the child and to provide the child an opportunity to express a view do not impede safe
and efficient case management. Additional information was included in the Explanatory
Memorandum to further explain the meaning, policy intention and operation of the ICL
provisions in the Amendment Act. This included providing further information about the
evidence and information that an ICL may seek to inform decision-making and case planning.
Recommendation 8
The Attorney General’s Department considers the amendments proposed by the Law Council
of Australia in relation to Schedule 5 and make any appropriate amendments to the Bill and
the Explanatory Memorandum.
Agreed.
The Government considered all recommendations of the Law Council of Australia relating to
Schedule 5 of the Bill. The Government amended the Bill to make clear that the family law
courts have the power to make harmful proceedings orders to prohibit the institution of
family law cross-proceedings, incidental proceedings and new or fresh proceedings. These
amendments will assist users of the legislation, particularly self-represented litigants, in
understanding the provision. The Government will provide information to family law
professionals and separating families on these changes to ensure the amendments are
understood by parties and effectively carried out by legal practitioners.
The Law Council of Australia recommended a number of safety-related amendments to both
harmful proceedings orders and the overarching purpose of family law practice and procedure
provisions. The Government does not agree with these amendments as they would dilute the
requirements for compliance with the statutory duties and consequences for non-compliance,
and would raise complexities similar to that of the repealed ‘friendly parent’ provisions
which caused parties to not disclose family violence for fear of being viewed as an unfriendly
parent. Additional information was provided in the Addendum to the Explanatory
Memorandum to make clear that parties may suffer harm from proceedings and do not have
to have experienced harm for a harmful proceedings order to be made.
The Law Council of Australia made suggestions relating to procedural fairness and safety
considerations for harmful proceedings orders, including inserting a sunset clause, providing
a respondent with advanced notice of an outcome of an application filed by an applicant, and
providing legal assistance to a party subject to a harmful proceedings order. The Government
notes that these suggestions may be considered at a later stage as they require further
consultation with the family law courts regarding the practical operation of harmful
proceedings orders.
12
Recommendation 9
The Attorney General’s Department further considers the policy issues raised by the Law
Council of Australia and the scrutiny concerns of the Scrutiny of Bills Committee and make
any appropriate amendments to the Bill or the Explanatory Memorandum.
Agreed in part.
The Government considered the policy issues raised by the Law Council of Australia in
relation to Schedule 6 of the Bill, including a proposed injunction power to allow a court to
stop an offending publication or to take down material published in breach of new Part
XIVB, and who can seek consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions to commence
proceedings under new Part XIVB. The Government considers an injunction power does not
need to be inserted due to complexities such as an injunction not having the desired effect if
the information has been widely circulated and a lack of clarity about who is circulating
information if on social media and the internet. The Government has clarified in the
Addendum to the Explanatory Memorandum that the Amendment Act does not limit who
may seek consent of the DPP to commence proceedings and is not intended to bar those with
law enforcement functions or private citizens from seeking such consent.
Recommendation 10
The Attorney General’s Department should consider the above drafting issues and make
appropriate amendments to the Bill or the Explanatory Memorandum.
Noted.
The Government has considered the drafting matters raised by the Law Council of Australia
and comments by Senator Scarr in relation to Schedule 6 of the Bill, including defining a
number of terms contained in new Part XIVB. The purpose of the repeal of section 121 of the
Family Law Act (section 121) and the insertion of new Part XIVB was to clarify and not
substantially change the law concerning communication of family law information.
To avoid unintended narrowing of the new Part and to maintain consistency in language used
across both section 121 and the new Part XIVB where possible, the Government has not
adopted amendments arising from this recommendation. In drafting the provisions, a range of
factors were considered, including the existing provisions contained in section 121, case law
and stakeholder feedback. The Government considers that the new Part XIVB strikes an
appropriate balance between necessary information sharing and the need to protect privacy of
parties in family court proceedings.
Recommendation 11
The Attorney-General’s Department considers any adjustments to the provisions of Part
IIIAA which are reasonably required to reflect the different appointment and oversight
characteristics of Court Child Experts and practitioners appointed as report writers under
Regulation 7, as opposed to private report writers not employed or appointed by the Court.
Noted.
13
The Amendment Act’s provisions already enable the regulations to distinguish between the
different cohorts of family report writers and apply standards and requirements to a class or
classes of family report writers where appropriate (subsection 11K(1)). Therefore,
amendments to the Bill were not required.
Recommendation 12
The Attorney-General’s Department undertakes further consultation with the relevant
professions and the Court with respect to any unintended consequences that may flow from
the Bill, in particular any disincentive that increased regulation and penalties may pose to
current or potential family report writers.
Noted.
Significant consultation has occurred on options to improve the competence and
accountability of family report writers, including through the consultation paper ‘Improving
the competency and accountability of family report writers’, released in late 2021, and on the
exposure draft of the Bill. The development of a regulatory scheme and associated
regulations will occur in further consultation with stakeholders.
Recommendation 13
The Attorney-General’s Department considers the above drafting issues in relation to
Schedule 7 and make any appropriate amendments to the Bill.
Noted.
Amendments to the Bill were not required. In relation to the concerns around the definition of
a ‘designated family report’, subsection 11J(2) clearly provides that all of the elements of
paragraphs 11J(1)(a), (b) and (c) must be satisfied for a report to be considered a ‘designated
family report’, and that these paragraphs must be read with 11J(2) which identifies the range
of provisions in the Family Law Act under which a family report may be ordered. Paragraphs
442, 445 and 446 in the Explanatory Memorandum also provide additional clarity as to the
definition of a designated family report.
The Government also did not support the suggested amendment that the legislation should
provide that the regulations ‘must’ deal with certain matters. The Amendment Act, and the
Explanatory Memorandum to the Bill, sets out appropriate parameters and limits for the
regulations. This facilitates the development of a regulatory approach to improve the
competency and accountability of family report writers, through the establishment of
standards and requirements, that is appropriately targeted at and tailored to the different
cohorts of professionals that write family reports.
Recommendation 14
That the timing of the review of the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
stand as originally legislated and Schedule 8 of the Bill be deleted.
Not agreed.
14
In 2021, when the FCFCOA Act commenced, subsection 284(1) of the FCFCOA Act
provided that the Minister must cause a review of the operation of the FCFCOA Act to be
conducted within 6 months after the fifth anniversary of that Act’s commencement.
Schedule 8 of the Amendment Act amends subsection 284(1) of the FCFCOA Act to bring
forward the review of the FCFCOA Act by two years.
This provides for a timelier assessment of the effectiveness and impact of the FCFCOA Act
on both the operation of the Court and its users and will enable earlier Government
consideration of improvements that may be required to the FCFCOA Act.
15
