Australian Government Response to the
Joint Standing Committee on the National Disability Insurance
Scheme Final Report
Inquiry into the Capability and Culture of the National Disability Insurance Agency
(NDIA)
March 2024
Introduction
The Australian Government (the Government) welcomes the Joint Standing Committee on
the National Disability Insurance Scheme’s (the Committee) final report of its inquiry into
the Capability and Culture of the National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA, the Agency).
On 14 September 2022, the Committee announced it had initiated an inquiry into the capability
and culture of the NDIA. The Committee would inquire into the implementation, performance,
governance, administration and expenditure of the National Disability Insurance Scheme
(NDIS), with particular reference to:
 the capability and culture of the NDIA, with reference to operational processes and
procedures, and the nature of staff employment:
 the impacts of NDIA capability and culture on the experiences of people with disability
and NDIS participants trying to access information, support and services from the
Agency; and
 any other relevant matters.
The Government notes that the Committee received a total of 206 submissions and held 13
public hearings across the country. The Committee tabled an interim report for this inquiry on
30 March 2023 and its final report on 16 November 2023.
The final report makes 27 recommendations. In addition, the Committee made five
recommendations in its interim report. There are a further three recommendations from the
Coalition and seven recommendations from the Australian Greens. This Government response
addresses all recommendations made in relation to the inquiry.
Two significant and related processes ran in parallel to this inquiry:
1. The Royal Commission into Violence, Abuse, Neglect and Exploitation of People with
Disability (the Disability Royal Commission) published its final report on
29 September 2023. It made 222 recommendations on how to improve laws, policies,
structures and practices to ensure a more inclusive and just society that supports the
independence of people with disability and their right to live free from violence, abuse,
neglect and exploitation.
2. The Independent Review of the NDIS (the NDIS Review) released its final report on
7 December 2023. It made 26 recommendations, with 139 detailed actions under these
recommendations, to help restore trust, ensure the Scheme’s sustainability, and deliver
a better NDIS experience for participants.
There is considerable overlap and alignment between the Committee’s recommendations in
its interim and final reports and the recommendations of the Disability Royal Commission
and the NDIS Review. The Government response to this inquiry notes where there is
alignment between these recommendations, and does not pre-empt the Government’s
response to the NDIS Review and the Disability Royal Commission.
The Government acknowledges that the Committee’s recommendations in its interim and
final reports, along with the recommendations of the Disability Royal Commission and the
NDIS Review, are aligned with the Government’s focus on rebuilding trust and confidence in
the NDIS and getting the Scheme back on track. The Government accepts reform is required
to secure the future of the NDIS, so that it can continue to provide life-changing outcomes for
2
current and future generations of Australians with disability. This hard work necessarily starts
with lifting the capability and capacity of the NDIA.
The Government is working openly and transparently, as it takes forward the further work
required with the disability community and state and territory governments on the response to
the Disability Royal Commission and the NDIS Review.
The Government has already invested more than $429.5 million through the 2023-24 Budget
to lift the NDIA’s capability, capacity and systems to better support participants. These
investments include better decision-making processes and planner capability for participants
with specialised needs, strengthening guidelines for planners on support volumes and
intensity, and providing clear minimum standards of evidence for assistance with daily living.
The Government is committed to transparency and partnership with the disability community
in delivering these initiatives.
The Government has also worked through National Cabinet on an initial response to key
aspects of the NDIS Review. On 6 December 2023, National Cabinet agreed to work together
to implement legislative and other changes to the NDIS to improve the experience of
participants and restore the original intent of the NDIS to support people with permanent and
significant disability, within a broader ecosystem of support.
The National Cabinet agreed to jointly design additional Foundational Supports to be jointly
commissioned by the Commonwealth and the states, with the work to be oversighted by the
First Secretaries Group.
An initial tranche of legislation will be introduced into the Commonwealth Parliament in the
first half of 2024, with rule changes phased in as developed.
This is a significant step. These commitments demonstrate governments’ ongoing
commitment to the NDIS. It reinforces support for the NDIS and the social and economic
inclusion of people with disability across the nation.
Discussions with the disability community will continue over the coming months as we work
together to make the positive changes needed for people with disability.
3
Inquiry into the Capability and Culture of the NDIA
Recommendations made by the Committee in the Interim Report
1. Interim Report – The Committee recommends that NDIA staff have comprehensive
training in disability awareness and anti-discrimination, and that the Government
support planners and other NDIA staff, including contact centre staff, develop
specialised skills in specific areas of disability and participants’ needs, so the
Scheme can serve the diversity of NDIS participants.
Australian Government response to Interim Report recommendation 1: Noted
The Government is committed to improving the training and development for NDIA staff so
that the NDIS works for all participants, including those from diverse backgrounds.
There are a number of initiatives underway including mandatory annual training
on contemporary disability rights, disability awareness and diversity for all people working
at the NDIA, access to a Disability Navigator and Disability Snapshots, a Disability
Inclusion Plan, deep dives led by the NDIA’s Disability Champion focused on improving
accessibility and inclusion, and co-designing a new Culturally and Linguistically Diverse
(CALD) strategy and First Nations strategy.
The NDIA is also transforming the National Contact Centre (NCC) by redeveloping and
expanding the NCC induction training, doubling the amount of training provided to staff,
creating and training specialist teams with a new additional advanced skills program, and
a skills-based routing model design, which will direct calls to specialised teams based
on menu selections.
The Government’s investment in the NDIA’s capability, culture and systems will build
on these initiatives and allow the NDIA to invest in a workforce capacity and capability
package to improve training, tools, and system improvements for planners and partners. It
will also improve the consistency, cultural inclusivity, and experience of the planning
process for both the frontline workforce and participants.
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 22 of the NDIS
Review to embed a highly skilled, person-centred, disability aware culture across all disability
agencies and governments.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
2. Interim Report - The Committee recommends that the Government lift staffing
caps and improve workplace culture to reduce staff turnover and improve the
experience of participants through continuity of relationships.
Australian Government response to Interim Report recommendation 2: Noted
The Government is committed to increasing permanent staffing at the NDIA, by reducing
insecure labour hire arrangements, investing in leadership capability development and
career pathways, and improving Agency culture.
The proportion of permanent Australian Public Service (APS) roles has increased from
69.59 per cent as of 30 June 2023 to 75.95 per cent as of 31 December 2023. Between
30 June 2023 and 31 December 2023, the number of permanent APS roles has increased by
1,279 (5,328 to 6,607). The number of temporary roles decreased, with APS non-ongoing
4
roles decreasing by 112 (324 to 212) and Labour Hire roles decreasing by 122 (2,004 to
1,882). 292 Labour Hire workers also transitioned to APS employment with the Agency over
this period.
Service Delivery roles continue to be the priority area of Agency workforce growth. Between
30 June 2023 and 31 December 2023, the number of Agency Planners has increased by 895
(2,303 to 3,198).
The implementation of the APS Strategic Commissioning Framework, released by the
Australian Public Service Commission in October 2023, will result in additional increases to
Agency ASL in financial years’ 23-24 and 24-25. The framework sets a clear expectation
that most roles and functions in Government Agencies will be delivered by APS employees
and outlines the limited circumstances in which external workforces such as labour hire can
be engaged. The Agency is currently developing an implementation plan to support to
support role transition and ensure adherence to the framework for new recruitment requests
in the Agency.
The Agency is making good progress in reducing rates of employee turnover. Over the
12 months to 31 December 2023, the Agency staff turnover rate for ongoing APS employees
has decreased from 11.20 per cent to 7.86 per cent; a reduction of 3.34 per cent.
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 22 of the NDIS
Review to embed a highly skilled, person-centred, disability aware culture across all disability
agencies and governments.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
3. Interim Report - The Committee recommends that the Government invest in
training of staff and updating systems to improve the quality and transparency of
decision-making, and to ensure that decisions consistently meet the requirements of
the NDIS Act, so participants do not have to tell their stories again and again to
multiple people.
Australian Government response to Interim Report recommendation 3: Noted
The Government is committed to ensuring the NDIS planning process is simpler and more
transparent for NDIS participants. The NDIA’s Participants, Platforms and Processes (3P)
Project will improve the consistent application of NDIA’s processes, and better support
participants through a new fit-for-purpose business system called PACE, to eventually replace
the NDIA’s current Customer Relationship Management (CRM) system and portals. The
PACE system was successfully tested in Tasmania and commenced national implementation
on 31 October 2023. The NDIA has been working directly with staff, participants, and
providers in designing the change program required to support implementation of PACE.
The NDIA is building PACE in a way that futureproofs the system, recognising it will need
to be flexible to implement future legislative changes and outcomes of ongoing codesign,
as required, including changes arising from the NDIS Review and the Disability Royal
Commission.
The Participant Service Improvement Plan (PSIP) is published on the NDIS website and
outlines 51 commitments to ensure NDIS transparency. These commitments have a strong
focus on a more consistent experience for NDIS participants when they are interacting with the
Agency, which is clearer and more easily understood.
5
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 3 of the NDIS
Review to provide a fairer and more consistent participant pathway and Recommendation 22
to embed a highly skilled, person-centred, disability aware culture across all disability agencies
and governments.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
4. Interim Report - The Committee recommends that the NDIA adopt a participant-
led, user-centred design approach to improve the participant experience, including
better supporting participants at life-changing events.
Australian Government response to Interim Report recommendation 4: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 3 of the NDIS
Review to provide a fairer and more consistent participant pathway.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final
report of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
5. Interim Report - The Committee recommends that the Government address the
concerns of participants that a plan underspend might lead to reduced funding in
their next plan.
Australian Government response to Interim Report recommendation 5: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 3 of the NDIS
Review to provide a fairer and more consistent participant pathway.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final
report of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
Recommendations made by the Committee in the Final Report
1. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the NDIA assess people according
to the totality of their disabilities and no longer require participants to nominate
‘primary disability’ and ‘secondary disability’.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 1: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 3 of the NDIS
Review to provide a fairer and more consistent participant pathway.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
2. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the NDIA review, publish and
implement changes to List A: Conditions that are likely to meet the disability
requirements, and List B: Conditions that are likely to result in a permanent
impairment to improve inclusion of invisible, episodic, rare, and psychosocial
disabilities.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 2: Noted
6
The Government notes amendments to the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) Act
2013, which took effect on 1 July 2022, clarified that episodic and fluctuating impairments can
be considered permanent when determining eligibility to the Scheme, including for people
with psychosocial disability.
The Government also notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 3 of the
NDIS Review to provide a fairer and more consistent participant pathway and
Recommendation 7 to introduce a new approach to NDIS supports for psychosocial disability,
focused on personal recovery, and develop mental health reforms to better support people with
severe mental illness.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
3. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the NDIA develop, publish, and
implement a mechanism to improve staff knowledge and acceptance of invisible,
episodic, rare, and psychosocial disabilities.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 3: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with the following recommendations in
the NDIS Review:
 Recommendation 3 to provide a fairer and more consistent participant pathway
 Recommendation 7 to introduce a new approach to NDIS supports for psychosocial
disability, focused on personal recovery, and develop mental health reforms to better
support people with severe mental illness
 Recommendation 22 to embed a highly skilled, person-centred, disability aware culture
across all disability agencies and governments.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
4. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the NDIA develop and implement
a mechanism to recruit and retain staff with specialised knowledge and skills
regarding invisible, episodic, rare, and psychosocial disabilities.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 4: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 7 of the NDIS
Review to introduce a new approach to NDIS supports for psychosocial disability, focused on
personal recovery, and develop mental health reforms to better support people with severe
mental illness and Recommendation 22 to embed a highly skilled, person-centred, disability
aware culture across all disability agencies and governments.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
7
5. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the NDIA focus its compliance
activities on the activities of service providers and subcontractors, to prevent
systematic fraud and to ensure that people with disability do not experience further
discrimination in wider society.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 5: Supported
The Fraud Fusion Taskforce (FFT) brings together 16 Government agencies to deliver a
whole-of-government capability uplift to detect and respond to potential fraudulent and
criminal activity against the NDIS and deliver greater integrity and fairness across
Commonwealth programs and payments.
The FFT has new capabilities to identify misuses of NDIS funds intended to support people
with disability. The FFT is reducing risk to participants by disrupting bad practice and
fraudulent behaviours of providers, including prosecuting and shutting them down. FFT
activities strengthen and improve the NDIS and other government systems, making it easy to
do the right thing and harder to do the wrong thing.
In addition, the NDIA regularly delivers a variety of education and awareness sessions to
assist providers to understand their roles and responsibilities as a NDIS provider. This
includes general sessions focused on operating as a provider within the NDIS, as well as
issues specific sessions on topics such as good payment practices. These information sessions
are supported by a variety of provider focused online resources available on the NDIS
website.
6. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the NDIS Quality and Safeguards
Commission make recommendations to the Fraud Fusion Taskforce for increasing
investigation, detection, and prosecution of systematic fraud against the Scheme.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 6: Supported
The Government notes the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission is a key contributor to
the Fraud Fusion Taskforce (FFT), being a permanent member on all governance committees,
driving the strategic direction of the FFT.
7. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work
with state and territory government counterparts to ensure that children with a
disability who need access to early childhood intervention services are able to do so,
especially in rural, regional and remote areas.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 7: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 6 of the NDIS
Review to create a continuum of support for children under the age of 9 and their families.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
8. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work
with state and territory governments to ensure that the rights and wishes of
participants of the NDIS are upheld and respected when they are under
guardianship and trustee orders.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 8: Noted
8
The Government notes the NDIA introduced a new Supported Decision Making policy in
April 2023 to better support people with disability to make decisions in the NDIS, including
those participants with child representatives and nominees under the NDIS Act.
The Government also notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 5 of the
NDIS Review to provide better support for people with disability to make decisions about
their lives, and Recommendation 6.15 of the Disability Royal Commission on updating the
national standards for public advocates, public guardians and public trustees.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final
reports of the NDIS Review and the Disability Royal Commission.
9. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the NDIA keep and maintain
accurate records of participants under guardianship and/or financial administration
orders.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 9: Noted
The Government notes the NDIA is working with state and territory guardian and financial
administrators to improve processes and management of records related to state and territory
guardianship and financial administration orders.
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 6.15 of the
Disability Royal Commission on updating the national standards for public advocates, public
guardians and public trustees.
The Government is considering these issues further as part of its response to the Disability
Royal Commission.
10. Final Report – The Committee recommends that, where a participant is under a
guardianship order, NDIA delegates and planners are required to meet with the
participant, including a face-to-face option, to ensure that plans reflect the wishes of
the participant.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 10: Noted
The Government notes the NDIA introduced a new Supported Decision Making policy in
April 2023 to better support people with disability to make decisions in the NDIS, including
those participants with child representatives and nominees under the NDIS Act.
The Government also notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 5 of the
NDIS Review to provide better support for people with disability to make decisions about
their lives and Recommendations 6.6 and 10.6 of the Disability Royal Commission in
relation to Supported Decision Making principles, and to amend the NDIS (Quality
Indicators for NDIS Practice Standards) Guidelines 2018 (Cth) to reflect that each participant
has opportunities to make decisions and is supported to develop their decision making skills
and communicate their will and preferences.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final reports
of the NDIS Review and the Disability Royal Commission.
9
11. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work
with its state and territory counterparts to establish a joint task force with the
powers necessary to investigate any instances where NDIS participants are exploited,
coerced, or abused while being supported by the state regulated Supported
Residential Services sector.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 11: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 9 of the NDIS
Review to deliver a diverse and innovative range of inclusive housing and living supports
and Recommendation 17 to develop and deliver a risk-proportionate model for the visibility
and regulation of all providers and workers, and strengthen the regulatory response to long-
standing and emerging quality and safeguards issues.
This recommendation also overlaps with Disability Royal Commission recommendations
10.13, 10.14 and 10.15 in relation to creating an independent investigators panel for
complaint handling and investigative practice guidelines.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final reports
of the NDIS Review and the Disability Royal Commission.
12. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work
with its state and territory counterparts to develop comprehensive guidance
regarding the regulation of disability accommodation providers who are also NDIS
providers.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 12: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 9 of the NDIS
Review to deliver a diverse and innovative range of inclusive housing and living supports
and Recommendation 17 to develop and deliver a risk-proportionate model for the visibility
and regulation of all providers and workers, and strengthen the regulatory response to long-
standing and emerging quality and safeguards issues.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
13. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the Australian Government
develop, publish, and implement a mechanism to ensure that a participant’s support
coordinators, accommodation provider, and support providers do not have conflicts
of interest that would impact the quality or safety of participant supports.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 13: Noted
The Government notes the NDIA regularly deliver a variety of education and awareness
sessions to assist providers understand their roles and responsibilities and expectations of
good practice. This includes advice on identifying and managing conflict of interest.
The Government also notes this recommendation overlaps with the following
recommendations from the NDIS Review:
 Recommendation 9 to deliver a diverse and innovative range of inclusive housing and
living supports
10
 Recommendation 10 to invest in digital infrastructure for the NDIS to enable
accessible, timely and reliable information and streamlined processes that strengthen
NDIS market functioning and scheme integrity
 Recommendation 17 to develop and deliver a risk-proportionate model for the visibility
and regulation of all providers and workers, and strengthen the regulatory response to
long-standing and emerging quality and safeguards issues.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
14. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the Australia Government re-
evaluate the design of grant funding under the Information, Linkages and Capacity
Building program, giving consideration to the complexity and transparency of the
application process, length of funding periods, and amount of funding available.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 14: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 1 of the NDIS
Review to invest in foundational supports to bring fairness, balance and sustainability to the
ecosystem supporting people with disability.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
15. Final Report – The Committee recommends the Australian Government promote
secure, long-term investment in activities that support people with disability,
including through Information, Linkages and Capacity Building funding.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 15: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 1 of the NDIS
Review to invest in foundational supports to bring fairness, balance and sustainability to the
ecosystem supporting people with disability.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
16. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the Information, Linkages and
Capacity Building program be refocused to better meet the needs of people with
disability through ongoing evaluation of outcomes and facilitation of information
sharing and strategic development of services across jurisdictions.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 16: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 1 of the NDIS
Review to invest in foundational supports to bring fairness, balance and sustainability to the
ecosystem supporting people with disability.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
11
17. Final Report – The Committee recommends the Australian Government revise the
administrative arrangements for Information, Linkages and Capacity Building
grants, consistent with recommendation 5.6 of the Royal Commission into Violence,
Abuse, Neglect and Exploitation of People with Disability for the Australian
Government to establish new governance arrangements for disability policies and
programs.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 17: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 1 of the NDIS
Review to invest in foundational supports to bring fairness, balance and sustainability to the
ecosystem supporting people with disability and Recommendation 5.6 of the Disability
Royal Commission to establish new governance arrangements for disability policies and
programs.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final
reports of the NDIS Review and the Disability Royal Commission.
18. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the Department of Social Services
revise the role of Local Area Coordinators to ensure sufficient resources are directed
to the roles of capacity building, information sharing, and community engagement,
alongside coordinating NDIS supports.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 18: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 1 of the NDIS
Review to invest in foundational supports to bring fairness, balance and sustainability to the
ecosystem supporting people with disability and Recommendation 4 to support all people
with disability to navigate mainstream, foundational and NDIS service systems.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
19. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the NDIA ensure that planners
fully explore current and future accommodation and support needs with participants
during pre-planning, planning and plan reviews.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 19: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 8 of the NDIS
Review to fund housing and living supports that are fair and consistent, and support
participants to exercise genuine choice and control over their living arrangement.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
20. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the NDIA allow participants to use
plan budgets more flexibly, including in situations where short term or emergency
accommodation is required.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 20: Noted
12
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 3 of the NDIS
Review to provide a fairer and more consistent participant pathway and Recommendation 8 to
fund housing and living supports that are fair and consistent, and support participants to
exercise genuine choice and control over their living arrangement.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
21. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the NDIA develop and publish
clear, comprehensive guidance material for participants who seek to transition into
other forms of supported accommodation, including state disability housing,
Supported Independent Living, or Specialist Disability Accommodation.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 21: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 8 of the NDIS
Review to fund housing and living supports that are fair and consistent, and support
participants to exercise genuine choice and control over their living arrangement.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
22. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the NDIA implement mechanisms
to support women with disability who are at risk of, or have experienced, domestic,
family and sexual violence, including expedited approvals for Supported
Independent Living, Specialist Disability Accommodation and Short Term
Accommodation, where it is considered reasonable and necessary.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 22: Noted
The Government notes the NDIA released the Participant Safeguarding Policy and
Implementation Plan in April 2023. The Agency’s initial focus is to support frontline staff to
have a more complete and individualised view of participant risk of harms from abuse,
neglect, violence and exploitation, and opportunities to meaningfully mitigate these risks
through supports that can be provided through NDIS supports and services. The
implementation of the Policy will include a capability uplift of NDIA staff and partners to
further embed a safeguarding culture within the NDIA.
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with NDIS Review Recommendations
8 and 9 regarding housing and living supports, and Recommendation 16 regarding
safeguarding.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
23. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the NDIA improve connections
with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peak organisations with the goal of
improving co-design, and access to culturally appropriate services.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 23: Noted
The Government notes the NDIA and First Peoples Disability Network (FPDN) jointly
established a First Nations Advisory Council in 2023. First Nations Advisory Council
members include First Nations people with lived experience of disability, peak body, and
13
sector representatives.
The NDIA will work with the First Nations Advisory Council to discuss and make shared
decisions about the goals, strategies, and initiatives that affect First Nations people with
disability. This included working on a review NDIS First Nations Strategy and action plan.
The NDIA is progressing the development of a new First Nations Strategy, to replace the
2017 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Strategy. The NDIS has publicly committed to
working with First Nations people with disability, participants, the broader First Nations
disability community, families, carers, and sector stakeholders to co-design this strategy.
The Government also notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 14 of the
NDIS Review to improve access to supports for First Nations participants across Australia and
for all participants in remote communities through alternative commissioning arrangements
and Recommendation 20 to create a new compact between Australian governments.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
24. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the NDIA improve connections
with Culturally and Linguistically Diverse peak organisations with the goal of
improving co-design, and access to culturally appropriate services.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 24: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 2 of the NDIS
Review to increase the scale and pace of change in mainstream and community inclusion and
accessibility and improve the connection between mainstream services and the NDIS and
Recommendation 22 to embed a highly skilled, person-centred, disability aware culture
across all disability agencies and governments.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
25. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the NDIA invest in building staff
capacity to drive an inclusive culture and appropriate support for LGBTQIA+
people with a disability.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 25: Noted
The Government notes the NDIA is working with the disability and LGBTIQA+ community to
review and update the NDIS LGBTIQA+ Strategy in 2024.
The Government also notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 1 of the
NDIS Review to invest in foundational supports to bring fairness, balance and sustainability to
the ecosystem supporting people with disability and Recommendation 22 to embed a highly
skilled, person-centred, disability aware culture across all disability agencies and
governments.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
14
26. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the Department of Social Services
provide ongoing and adequate funding of advocacy organisations, including
disability advocacy organisations.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 26: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 1 of the NDIS
Review to invest in foundational supports to bring fairness, balance and sustainability to the
ecosystem supporting people with disability and Recommendation 6.21 of the Disability
Royal Commission on additional funding for advocacy programs.
The Government is considering these issues further as part of its response to the release of
the final reports of the NDIS Review and the Disability Royal Commission.
27. Final Report – The Committee recommends that the Australian Government has
regard to the recommendations of the Disability Royal Commission 4.7 (right to live
free from exploitation, violence, abuse), 6.41 (legislative prohibition of
non-therapeutic sterilisation), 7.3 (improve policies and procedures on the provision
of reasonable adjustments to students with disability) and 10.1 (embedding human
rights) in the implementation of the NDIS and throughout the participant planning
pathway.
Australian Government response to Final Report recommendation 27: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with the following recommendations
of the Disability Royal Commission and the NDIS Review:
 Recommendation 4.7 of the Disability Royal Commission on the right to live free
from exploitation, violence, abuse
 Recommendation 6.41 of the Disability Royal Commission on legislative prohibition
of non-therapeutic sterilization
 Recommendation 7.3 of the Disability Royal Commission to improve policies and
procedures on the provision of reasonable adjustments to students with disability
 Recommendation 10.1 of the Disability Royal Commission on embedding human
rights
 Recommendation 6 of the NDIS Review to Create a continuum of support for
children under the age of 9 and their families
The Government is considering these issues further as part of its response to the release of
the final reports of the NDIS Review and the Disability Royal Commission.
Recommendations made by the Coalition in the Final Report
1. Coalition – The Committee recommends that the NDIA co-design and implement a
Sex and Relationships policy to give NDIA staff and participants clear guidelines on
the approach to related supports. Additionally, the Committee recommends that
planners and coordinators are trained to engage with participants about
relationships and sexual expression goals during the development of plans.
Australian Government response to Coalition recommendation 1: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 3 of the NDIS
Review to provide a fairer and more consistent participant pathway.
15
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
2. Coalition – The Committee recommends the ILC program be administered by the
NDIA, with robust links with the Department of Social Services.
Australian Government response to Coalition recommendation 2: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 1 of the NDIS
Review to invest in foundational supports to bring fairness, balance and sustainability to the
ecosystem supporting people with disability.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
3. Coalition – We recommend the Labor Government resume releasing the NDIS
Monthly summaries, and immediately release the outstanding 2022-23 Annual
Financial Sustainability Report and the NDIS Independent Review in full.
Australian Government response to Coalition recommendation 3: Noted
The Government notes the 2022-23 Annual Financial Sustainability Report was released on
8 December 2023 and the NDIS Review was released on 7 December 2023.
The Government also notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 23 of the
NDIS Review to measure what matters, build an evidence base of what works, and create a
learning system.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
Recommendations made by the Australian Greens in the Final Report
1. Australian Greens – The Australian Greens recommend that the Standing Council of
Attorneys General expedite national consistency for public guardianship and
trustees, including improving the lives of disabled people by considering removing
the protection and confidentiality laws order, national consistency of fees,
transparency of decision-making, and implementing supported decision making and
reviews of orders.
Australian Government response to Australian Greens recommendation 1: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 6.15 of the
Disability Royal Commission on updating the national standards for public advocates, public
guardians and public trustees.
The Government is considering these issues further as part of its response to the final report
of the Disability Royal Commission.
16
2. Australian Greens – The Australian Greens recommend that the ILC program be
administered by the NDIA, with robust links with the Department of Social Services.
Australian Government response to Australian Greens recommendation 2: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 1 of the NDIS
Review to invest in foundational supports to bring fairness, balance and sustainability to the
ecosystem supporting people with disability.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
3. Australian Greens – The Australian Greens recommend that the NDIA ensure that
planners fully explore current and future accommodation and support needs with
participants during pre-planning, planning and plan review.
Australian Government response to Australian Greens recommendation 3: Noted
The Government notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 8 of the NDIS
Review to fund housing and living supports that are fair and consistent, and support
participants to exercise genuine choice and control over their living arrangement.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
4. Australian Greens – The Australian Greens recommend the NDIA review processes
to ensure they are inclusive of gender and sexuality, including exploring establishing
supports such as shared safe spaces for LGBTIQA+ disabled people.
Australian Government response to Australian Greens recommendation 4: Noted
The Government notes the NDIA is working with the disability and LGBTIQA+ community to
review and update the NDIS LGBTIQA+ Strategy in 2024.
The Government also notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 1 of the
NDIS Review to invest in foundational supports to bring fairness, balance and sustainability to
the ecosystem supporting people with disability and Recommendation 3 to provide a fairer and
more consistent participant pathway.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
5. Australian Greens – The Australian Greens note the impact of algorithmic
technologies, such as Robodebt and recommend that the NDIA and the Department
of Social Services immediately cease any use of algorithmic technologies or
automated decision-making with participants.
Australian Government response to the Australian Green’s recommendation 5: Noted
The Government notes NDIS access and planning decisions are not made using algorithmic
technologies or in an automated manner. The NDIA uses data to assist in the prioritisation of
work and to support staff in making decisions by providing benchmarks. This approach is
17
consistent with that used more broadly within an insurance context to enable efficient decision
making. It is important to note that a human is still required to review all available
information and make a determination.
6. Australian Greens – The Australian Greens recommend the NDIA take steps to
ensure financial transparency, including making available to the public the full
Annual Financial Sustainability Reports.
Australian Government response to Australian Greens recommendation 6: Noted
The Government notes the 2022-23 Annual Financial Sustainability Report was released on
8 December 2023.
The Government also notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 23 of the
NDIS Review to measure what matters, build an evidence base of what works, and create a
learning system.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
7. Australian Greens – The Australian Greens recommend that NDIA planners and
coordinators are trained to engage with participants about relationships, gender, and
sexual expression goals during the development of plans.
Australian Government response to the Australian Green’s recommendation 7: Noted
The Government notes NDIA staff are required to complete online training in Unconscious
Bias, Diversity and Inclusion.
The Government also notes this recommendation overlaps with Recommendation 3 of the
NDIS Review to provide a fairer and more consistent participant pathway and
Recommendation 4 to support all people with disability to navigate mainstream, foundational
and NDIS service systems.
The Government is considering these issues further in response to the release of the final report
of the NDIS Review in late 2023.
18
