Australian Government response to the
Senate Standing Committees on Education and Employment
report:
The national trend of school refusal and related matters
APRIL 2024
Overview
The Australian Government (the Government) thanks the Senate Education and
Employment References Committee (Committee) for its work on the inquiry into the
national trend of school refusal and related matters.
The Government welcomes the opportunity to respond to the inquiry and acknowledges
and thanks those individuals who shared their personal experiences and the contribution
they have made to this inquiry.
The Government is committed to ensuring that every Australian child enjoys the benefits of
education. School refusal is a concern for the mental health and wellbeing impacts on young
Australians educational engagement and attendance.
The response to the Committee’s recommendations has been coordinated by the
Department of Education, in consultation with the following Government agencies:
• Department of Health and Aged Care (DoHAC)
• National Indigenous Australians Agency (NIAA)
• Department of Social Services (DSS).
The Government recognises that working with states and territories and the
non-government education sector is key to implementing effective and holistic policy
improvements that respond to the issue of school refusal. While the Government plays a
leadership role in setting and delivering on national priorities in school education, the
administration of schools is the constitutional responsibility of state and territory
governments. The Government acknowledges work is continuing across all sectors to
address school refusal, as noted in the Committee’s report. The Government will continue
to work in partnership with states and territories to explore potential opportunities to
improve school refusal issues, including progressing work through existing national
education policy forums and intergovernmental architecture.
Language used
The Australian Government Response reflects the language and terminology used by the
Committee. The Government understands that many view the term ‘school refusal’ as
mispresenting a student’s absence from school as a deliberate choice. However, it notes the
current lack of consensus around preferred terminology and has chosen to use the term
‘school refusal’ throughout this report.
The Government also respects that preferred ways of self-describing are highly personal
choices for the autistic and wider neurodivergent community. This response will use identity
first language to align with the language used by the Committee.
2
Recommendation 1
As an initial step in the broader school refusal research agenda, the committee
recommends that Education Ministers task the Australian Education Research
Organisation with research into:
• the drivers and prevalence of school refusal in Australia; and
• the use, cost, and effectiveness of school refusal interventions used in Australia and
overseas, including flexible approaches to school education.
This research should inform the Australian Education Research Organisation’s advice to
Education Ministers on the causes of declining school attendance and evidence-based
approaches to support educational outcomes (arising from the 27 February 2023
Education Ministers Meeting). It should also inform future school refusal research projects,
as well as the development of national school refusal resources (see Recommendation 2).
This research should also inform the establishment of a nationally agreed definition of
school refusal (see Recommendation 6).
Agree in principle
The Australian Government recognises the importance of expanding the evidence base of
school refusal research and the importance of establishing a strong foundation for which to
base and inform future research and initiatives, such as a nationally agreed definition of
school refusal.
In February 2023 Education Ministers, through the Education Ministers Meeting (EMM),
commissioned the Australian Education Research Organisation (AERO) to investigate the
causes of declining attendance and provide advice to Ministers on evidence-based
approaches that support attendance. The Government notes that AERO’s research into
school attendance has already progressed. AERO’s interim report was due to be provided to
Education Ministers in late 2023, with the final report due to Education Ministers in the first
half of 2024.
The Government will work within the existing EMM architecture to consider subsequent
research into school refusal, which may build on AERO’s findings in relation to school
attendance. Further research activities may include consultation with youth mental health
research organisations to share existing work in the school refusal space, or further research
commissioned through EMM.
3
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with state and territory
education authorities and the non-government school sector to develop and promote
resources about school refusal, once a nationally agreed definition has been established,
for parents, teachers and school leaders.
These resources should be informed by the research undertaken by the Australian
Education Research Organisation as part of Recommendation 1.
Noted
The Government acknowledges the responsibility of this recommendation is shared
between the Government, state and territory education authorities and the
non-government school sector. The Government will continue to engage with state and
territory governments and the non-government school sector, for example through
Education Ministers Meeting, to respond to this recommendation.
The Government will continue to update the Student Wellbeing Hub with new resources on
school refusal for parents, teachers and school leaders.
The Government funds the Student Wellbeing Hub, which provides a range of freely
available information and resources for educators, students, parents and families to assist
to create and maintain a safe and supportive school environment. The Student Wellbeing
Hub includes resources on a range of topics, including mental health, physical wellbeing,
bullying and cyberbullying, online safety and some existing resources on student attendance
and school refusal. The Student Wellbeing Hub, hosted by Education Services Australia
(ESA), is available at www.studentwellbeinghub.edu.au.
4
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that state and territory governments review their child health
and development screening programs to identify opportunities to improve early
identification of autism, ADHD, specific learning disorders, and anxiety disorders, in order
to provide the classroom support these students might need.
Noted
The Government acknowledges this recommendation falls within the responsibility of state
and territory education authorities and the non-government school sector and has referred
this recommendation to state and territory education authorities and the non-government
school sector for consideration.
The Government is committed to inclusive education and improving educational and mental
health outcomes for all students. This is a key policy priority of Australia’s Disability Strategy
2021–2031 (ADS) and the National Action Plan for the Health of Children and Young People
2020–2030 for health outcomes.
Although child development screening is the responsibility of state and territory
governments, the Government funds initiatives to support the assessment and diagnosis of
mental health and developmental disorders in children, including but not limited to:
• Actions under the Early Childhood Targeted Action Plan of the ADS, which focuses on
children from infancy to school age with disability or developmental concerns, their
families, and carers.
• Funding pre-emptive early intervention pilots for infants with early signs of autism to
provide strengths-based and family-based supports to young children aged 9–14
months of age and their families. The pilots will be delivered in partnership with
selected states and/or territories.
• The National Early Childhood Program for children with disability or developmental
concerns, which aims to support young children (aged 0 to 8 years) with newly
identified disability or emerging developmental concerns and their parents and
carers.
• The National Guidelines funded by DoHAC support states and territories to consider
wellbeing in early childhood health checks being led by the National Mental Health
Commission.
• Head to Health Kids Hubs funded by DoHAC provide free multidisciplinary
assessment and support for children 0–12 years and their families.
• The Department of Education’s Positive Partnerships program and Starting School
resources hosted on the Student Wellbeing Hub website support school-aged
autistic students, and families and teachers of autistic children.
• Be You funded by DoHAC assists educators to promote mental health and wellbeing
in the classroom and builds the mental health literacy of educators to identify when
children need support and know where to go for assessment and supports.
• DoHAC’s National Workforce Centre for Child Mental Health upskills professionals to
identify, assess and support children at risk of mental health conditions.
5
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that state and territory education authorities and the
non-government school sector identify opportunities for earlier identification of students
at risk of school withdrawal, particularly at key school transition points. This may
include—but should not be limited to—analysis of school absence data and the use of
screening tools.
The committee encourages state and territory education authorities and the
non-government school sector to broaden data collection to account for differences in
attendance. The committee acknowledges that there is a difference between absences due
to truancy, school withdrawal, or school refusal.
Noted
The Government acknowledges this recommendation falls within the responsibility of state
and territory education authorities and the non-government school sector and has referred
this recommendation to state and territory education authorities and the non-government
school sector for consideration.
6
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends that state and territory education authorities and the
non-government school sector investigate ways to increase the flexibility of education
delivery, including by:
• identifying ways to enhance flexibility in mainstream school settings for children
going through school refusal;
• facilitating easier access to distance education and home schooling for students
experiencing school refusal; and
• facilitating the provision of more alternative and specialist school settings that
cater for students experiencing school refusal.
Noted
The Government acknowledges this recommendation falls within the responsibility of state
and territory education authorities and the non-government school sector and has referred
this recommendation to state and territory education authorities and the non-government
school sector for consideration.
7
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends that Education Ministers develop a national action plan on
school refusal (national action plan), informed by research that has been conducted by the
Australian Education Research Organisation (see Recommendation 1). The national action
plan should be developed within 12 months and should include:
• a nationally agreed definition and terminology for school refusal;
• a nationally consistent approach to recording school absences, as well as an agreed
approach to public reporting of school refusal absences;
• a nationally agreed approach to messaging in relation to school attendance, school
refusal, and the recording of school absences;
• a nationally agreed approach to provide support to parents and students going
through school refusal by increasing accessibility and awareness of alternative
methods of schooling;
• a national commitment to prioritise implementation of the Unique Student
Identifier (USI) and agreement about how the USI will be used to identify students
at risk of school refusal, facilitate information sharing about those students, and
support research into school refusal;
• nationally agreed research priorities, as well as an information sharing and
dissemination strategy, particularly to reduce stigma and support understanding of
school refusal;
• agreement that a multi-tiered system of support approach be used to guide
approaches to, and investments in, school refusal interventions (noting this would
be implemented largely at a local level); and
• agreed roles and responsibilities, an implementation timeline, key performance
indicators, and a monitoring and evaluation strategy.
Development of the national action plan should be a collaborative process involving
health and education professionals, service providers, and people with lived experience of
school refusal—with a particular focus on neurodivergent young people and those with
mental health challenges. The national action plan should also align with existing national
strategies, where appropriate, and be informed by the recommendations of this inquiry.
The committee encourages the expert review panel on the National School Reform
Agreement to take into consideration the recommendations of this report.
Noted
The Government notes this recommendation. Pending the findings of research conducted
by AERO, the Government will refer this matter to EMM for discussion.
The Government shared this report with the Expert Panel to Inform a Better and Fairer
Education System.
The Government recognises the lead role of state and territory education authorities and
the non-government school sector play in the delivery of education and operation of
schools. The Government will explore the feasibility of the development of a national plan
through the EMM architecture, within the timeframe expressed by the Committee. A
8
national action plan that outlines the above requirements would provide clear policy
direction for school systems and the wider education system and be complementary to the
arrangements between the Government and state and territory education authorities and
the non-government school sector.
In December 2022, Education Ministers agreed on a model to roll-out the Unique Student
Identifier (USI) nationally to all school students. Minsters also agreed that the baseline use
of the Schools USI will be to support the transfer of student information when individuals
move between schools and systems through the inclusion of the USI in the agreed data set
under the Student Data Transfer Protocol once operating, and that no further uses will be
considered by Ministers until the initiative is fully implemented and every school student
has a national USI.
In line with Closing the Gap Priority Reform 1, work on the national action plan should
proceed in partnership with First Nations people and their representative organisations such
as consultation with Aboriginal Education Consultative Groups (AECG), the National
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Education Council (NATSIEC) and SNAICC – National
Voice for our Children (SNAICC) to develop an understanding of the depth of the issue and
include First Nations perspectives into strategies. AERO research should ensure
consideration of First Nations students’ experience of school refusal to help provide
evidence to ensure that the National Action Plan is relevant for First Nations students.
9
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with state and territory
governments to identify ways to improve awareness and understanding of school
refusal—once a nationally agreed definition has been established—within the health
sector, with a particular focus on general practice, psychiatry, psychology and other
relevant allied health fields.
Once a nationally agreed definition has been established, the committee would welcome
the option to embed school refusal training within relevant tertiary education courses, as
well as ongoing professional development requirements.
To that end, the committee encourages the Australian Institute of Teaching and School
Leadership to work with state and territory regulatory authorities to ensure teacher
education and training courses incorporate modules on school refusal, once a nationally
agreed definition has been established. This could include modules for ongoing
professional development requirements.
Supported in-principle
The Government acknowledges responsibility of this recommendation sits with both the
Australian Government and state and territory education authorities and the
non-government school sector and has referred this recommendation to state and territory
education authorities and the non-government school sector for consideration.
The Government supports this recommendation in-principle, noting the course content of
initial teacher education (ITE) programs are set under the nationally agreed Accreditation of
Initial Teacher Education Programs in Australia: Standards and Procedures (Accreditation
Standards). ITE programs should prepare ITE students to meet the Australian Professional
Standards for Teachers, which include standards relating to creating and maintaining
supportive and safe learning environments. This approach to ITE accreditation sets national
quality standards while allowing higher education providers and schools the flexibility to
design and deliver teacher training to meet local needs and circumstances.
The Government will refer proposed amendments of the Accreditation Standards to EMM
for discussion, as responsibility for setting priorities for teacher professional learning sits
with state and territory teacher regulatory authorities and government and
non-government education departments.
The Government, through the DoHAC, is responsible for the National Workforce Centre for
Child Mental Health and works with vocational and tertiary education providers in health
and social services to integrate resources around child mental health into their respective
curriculums. The National Centre also helps to build capacity of health workforces to
support children’s mental health and wellbeing, through provision of free, online,
evidence-based training, resources and information and has reach across the health sector
that can be leveraged and built upon to disseminate training and resources regarding school
refusal once developed.
Be You funded by the DoHAC works with tertiary institutions to incorporate mental health
and wellbeing resources into their courses to increase mental health literacy amongst
pre-service educators.
10
Recommendation 8
The committee recommends that state and territory education authorities and the
non-government school sector review and update current messaging about the
importance of school attendance to ensure that it:
• reflects a nuanced view of attendance that does not further alienate families
dealing with school refusal; and
• provides information about how to access support for attendance difficulties such
as school refusal; and
• recognises that for some students, where attendance is not possible, that
delivering tailored educational outcomes through an alternative method of
schooling is the priority.
Noted
The Government acknowledges this recommendation falls within the responsibility of state
and territory education authorities and the non-government school sector and has referred
this recommendation to state and territory education authorities and the non-government
school sector for consideration.
The Government through the DoHAC funds the Parenting Education and Support Program,
delivered by Triple P International, which includes a marketing and campaigning aspect
focused on combating stigma around parents seeking to build parenting strategies to
support their child’s wellbeing. The Raising Healthy Minds app, delivered by the Raising
Children Network, provides parents and carers with mental health literacy information to
better equip them to support children’s social and emotional wellbeing, as well as strategies
for supporting their own self-care and family wellbeing.
11
Recommendation 9
The committee recommends that state and territory education authorities and the
non-government school sector work together to develop resources to support the use of
trauma-informed practices in schools, so they can implement best-practice methods to
support students to continue with their education.
Noted
The Government acknowledges this recommendation falls within the responsibility of state
and territory education authorities and the non-government school sector and has referred
this recommendation to state and territory education authorities and the non-government
school sector for consideration.
The Government recognises the importance of trauma-informed practices in schools and
acknowledges the use of best-practice methods to support all students, including
neurodiverse and First Nations students. The Government will explore opportunities to
support state and territory education authorities and the non-government school sector to
implement best-practice methods.
Using a trauma-informed approach is addressed in one of the two professional-learning
modules being developed by Education Services Australia (ESA) to support the Get Ready to
Learn online resource in the Autism section of the Student Wellbeing Hub. The second
module, called Supporting Emotional Regulation, includes two sub-modules:
• Trauma and emotional dysregulation – What can cause students to express big
emotions or experience behavioural challenges? And how do environmental or
sensory triggers in the classroom play a role?
• Trauma-informed approach – You can support students who experience severe
dysregulation by creating a safe environment, fostering relationships, and improving
their emotional self-regulation skills.
12
Recommendation 10
The committee recommends that state and territory education authorities and the
non-government school sector work together to develop and promote stable and ongoing
resources to support effective family engagement. This should include the provision of
specialist family engagement support staff in schools.
Noted
The Government acknowledges this recommendation falls within the responsibility of state
and territory education authorities and the non-government school sector and has referred
this recommendation to state and territory education authorities and the non-government
school sector for consideration.
Recommendation 9 of the Department of Education’s Next steps: Report of the Quality
Initial Teacher Education Review (2021) states ‘families and carers are the key partners with
teachers in their children’s learning and the Expert Panel recommends more resources be
created for families and carers to understand what teaching best practice looks like’.1
Recent parent engagement resources funded by the Government include:
• The Family-School Partnerships Framework was developed to promote and guide
partnership building between parent and schools. The Framework includes
supporting material, research insights, practical advice and a range of resources
including fact sheets and case studies.
• Learning Potential, created in 2015, is a module based online resource developed
specifically for parents to help them support their child’s learning.
• Part of the Student Wellbeing Hub online modules includes topics for parents such as
safety, bullying, interoception and decision making for parents to work with their
child and the school to build a happy and safe learning community.
• Australian Research Alliance for Children and Youth (ARACY) published in 2020
Parent and Family Engagement – an implementation guide for school communities.
This resource provides school communities with practical guidance on better
engagement and how to implement successful parent and family engagement
practices, focusing on the ‘how’ rather than just the ‘why’.
1 Quality Initial Teacher Education Review (2021) Next Steps: Report of the Quality Initial Teacher Education
Review, Canberra: iv.
13
Recommendation 11
The committee acknowledges that the process of receiving a formal disability diagnosis is
expensive and can have extended wait times. To this end, the committee recommends
that state and territory education authorities and the non-government school sector work
together to identify and implement measures to build the capacity of schools to provide
reasonable adjustments for students in line with the requirements of the Disability
Standards for Education 2005. This could include the provision of additional specialist
support staff in schools and/or providing teachers with the opportunity to acquire
Universal Design in Learning skills through additional professional development.
Noted
The Government acknowledges the responsibility of this recommendation is shared
between the Government, state and territory education authorities and the
non-government school sector. The Government has referred this to state and territory
education authorities and the non-government school sector for consideration.
The Government acknowledges that all schools in Australia are required under the Disability
Standards for Education 2005 (the Standards) to provide reasonable adjustments for
students with disability to enable access and participation in education, equal to their peers.
The definition of disability in section 1.4 of the Standards is broad and covers a past,
current, future or imputed disability. Students do not need to have a diagnosed disability to
be protected under the Standards.
The Government, through the Department of Education, undertook a review of the
Standards in 2020. The review found that students with disability had better experiences
when their educators and education providers had a good understanding of the Standards.
The Government is working with state and territory and non-government education
authorities to implement the review recommendations, including strengthening the
knowledge and capability of educators and providers in relation to the requirement of the
Standards.
The Government has released resources including case studies and an animated explainer
video to help schools better understand their legal and professional obligations to students
with disability. They are available at www.nccd.edu.au/dse. New resources are available to
provide teachers and school leaders with practical examples of supporting the inclusion of
students with disability. The resources, developed by the Australian Institute for Teaching
and School Leadership (AITSL) in consultation with disability and education organisations,
are available at www.aitsl.edu.au/teach/supporting-students-with-disability.
The Government is investing $29.1 billion for school recurrent funding in 2024. Of this, an
estimated $3.6 billion will be provided for the student with disability loading. The student
with disability loading is based on the Nationally Consistent Collection of Data on School
Students with Disability (NCCD). The NCCD provides information about the number of
students with disability in schools and the adjustments they receive. The NCCD groups
school students with disability by the level of support they need to access and participate in
learning. More information about the NCCD is available at www.nccd.edu.au.
14
Recommendation 12
The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with state and territory
governments to identify and promote effective models for collaboration between the
education and health sectors in relation to school refusal.
Noted
The Government acknowledges the responsibility of this recommendation is shared
between the Government, state and territory education authorities and the
non-government school sector. The Government has referred this to state and territory
education authorities and the non-government school sector for consideration.
The Government will explore and discuss opportunities with state and territory
governments to identify and promote effective models for collaboration between the
education and health sectors related to school refusal. This may include through existing
mechanisms of the EMM and the Health Ministers Meeting.
The importance of collaboration between health and education service providers to support
children’s mental health and wellbeing is highlighted in the Children’s Mental Health and
Wellbeing Strategy. Action 2.2d of the Children’s Strategy specifically recommends that
mental health professionals be required to communicate with educators and other service
providers about a child’s treatment and support plan, with the family’s permission and
subject to this being deemed clinically appropriate.
Collaboration between schools and health professionals is important given the links
identified in the Committee’s Report between school refusal and mental health concerns,
and the need to conceptualise school refusal through a mental health lens. There is work to
be done to determine how this collaboration would operate in practice. However, at a high
level, the potential benefits of collaboration between the education and health sectors run
both ways: educators and learning communities can refer children who are beginning to
experience attendance difficulties or who are exhibiting signs of poor mental health to
health providers for support; and health providers can notify educators when they identify
mental health challenges in children and young people that may require additional
classroom support to prevent or reduce school refusal.
Be You and the National Workforce Centre for Child Mental Health collaborate in relation to
their respective work upskilling education, health and social services workforces.
Additionally, the National Workforce Centre, delivered by Emerging Minds is developing a
workforce package aimed at supporting partnerships between parents, educators and
health professionals to be able to connect and communicate around children’s mental
health.
15
Recommendation 13
The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with state and territory
governments to explore funding sources for an independent peer support network for
families and schools going through school refusal to receive resources and support. This
could include improving resources for parents, including a ‘one-stop shop’ for information
about school refusal and the support options available to students and families.
The committee recognises the current situation where there is no nationally recognised
school refusal advocacy and support group for parents. To this end, the committee
encourages the Australian Government to consider the importance of such support groups
for parents.
Noted
The Government acknowledges the responsibility of this recommendation is shared
between the Government, state and territory education authorities and the
non-government school sector. The Government has referred this to state and territory
education authorities and the non-government school sector for consideration.
The Government acknowledges the importance of the lived experience of students, families
and school communities in relation to school refusal. The Government also acknowledges
the impact on parents and carers of families who experience school refusal, including the
mental and physical health and wellbeing, financial and employment impacts. The
Government recognises the importance of support groups for parents, particularly in
relation to a complex and often misunderstood issue such as school refusal.
The Government will explore opportunities with state and territory governments to provide
funding for independent peer support for families and schools experiencing school refusal.
16
Recommendation 14
The committee recommends that the Australian Government investigate increasing the
number of subsidised mental health care visits for students experiencing school refusal.
Noted
The Government acknowledges this the importance of this recommendation and notes that
support is available for all people with a diagnosed mental disorder under the Better Access
to Psychiatrists, Psychologists and General Practitioners through the Medicare Benefits
Schedule (Better Access) initiative, funded by the DoHAC. Medicare rebates are available for
up to 10 individual and 10 group mental health services per calendar year. More
information on the Better Access initiative and eligibility requirements is available at
www.health.gov.au/our-work/better-access-initiative#who-can-access-better-access-
rebates.
People who have used all their Better Access services for the calendar year and need
additional support may be eligible for other government funded services. The Government
funds a range of free or low-cost services for people with or at risk of mental illness. These
include regional services commissioned by Australia’s 31 Primary Health Networks, a
national network of Head to Health Adult Mental Health Centres. People can find contact
details for their local PHN by visiting: www.health.gov.au/initiatives-and-
programs/phn/your-local-phn.
Further, through the 2023–24 Budget, the Government is investing $586.9 million in the
mental health and suicide prevention system. This investment will lay the groundwork to
make real, structural changes in response to the Better Access evaluation. It includes $91.3
million to address critical shortages in the psychology workforce and $17.8 million to upskill
the broader health workforce in mental health. Improving the availability of the workforce
will help ensure there is equity in service delivery, enabling longer-term reform.
17
Australian Greens Senators’ Additional Comments
Recommendation 15
Students, and parents as their advocates, are best placed to speak to and guide their own
experiences. For this reason, a national school refusal strategy should be guided by and
responsive to, the lived experiences of kids going through school refusal.
Recommendation 16
It is clear that for many students going through school refusal, the persistent inflexibility
of the education system is highly problematic. To enable these students to achieve the
best possible education outcomes, education systems and institutions need to be
supported to fully embrace inclusive education principles and be open and willing to
adapt for them. The federal government should take leadership in embedding this
flexibility into the public school system.
Recommendation 17
In order for schools and teachers to accommodate and meet the needs of students
refusing to go to school, funding needs to reflect the challenges of school refusal. School
refusal should be made a priority equity cohort in the National School Reform Agreement.
This could be done by accounting for absences within the Schooling Resource Standard
loadings, with more support offered to teachers and students that require focused
support.
Recommendation 18
Given the exclusion of education from the National Disability Insurance Scheme, state
governments cannot vacate the field for neurodivergent students, who are
disproportionately affected by school refusal. State governments should review the policy
support they provide neurodivergent children to receive a quality and inclusive education
and ensure it is funded adequately given the absence of National Disability Insurance
Scheme support.
Recommendation 19
In light of the immediate need for support for the thousands of students, parents, and
carers experiencing school refusal, the already existing but entirely voluntary advocacy
group, School Can’t Australia, should be provided funding as a priority until
Recommendation 13 of the committee’s report is implemented.
Noted
The Government’s position on the Australian Greens’ Senators Additional Comments has
been addressed in the response in Recommendations 3, 5, 6, 11 and 13.
The Government notes Recommendation 18 falls within the responsibility of state and
territory governments and the Government has referred the report to state and territory
education authorities and the non-government school sector for consideration.
18
