Australian Government response to the
Regional Affairs and Transport References Committee
report:

Fisheries quota system

April 2024

Introduction

On 7 December 2020, the Senate moved that the Rural and Regional Affairs and Transport
References Committee initiate an inquiry into the fisheries quota system including examining
whether the current ‘managed microeconomic system’ established around a set of individual
transferable quotas results in good fishing practice. The terms of reference for the inquiry
were to consider the fisheries quota system and examine whether the current ‘managed
microeconomic system’ established around a set of individual transferable quotas results in
good fishing practice, with particular reference to:

a) good fishing practice that is ecologically sustainable with an economic dynamic that
produces good community outcomes;

b) how the current quota system affects community fishers;

c) whether the current system disempowers small fishers and benefits large interest
groups;

d) the enforceability of ecological value on the current system, and the current system's
relationship to the health of the fisheries;

e) whether the current system results in good fishing practice that is ecologically;
sustainable and economically dynamic, and produces good community outcomes;

f) any other related matters.

The committee called five public hearings and received 71 submissions to inform its
deliberations and findings.

The Committee released its findings in December 2022, in a report titled Fisheries Quota
Systems. The Committee found that under the Commonwealth quota system, economic
performance, safety and ecological sustainability had generally improved. It concluded that
‘quota management in Commonwealth fisheries has been a success, and the committee
supports its continued application and development as a best practice management system’.

The Committee found there may be room for further improvement and made several
recommendations aimed at addressing concerns associated with quota systems. The
recommendations included reviewing the objectives of fisheries management to ensure they
remain fit for purpose, addressing market and competition issues, and further improving
ecological performance.

The government welcomes the Committee's report and thanks Committee members for their
work in delivering the report and its associated recommendations. We acknowledge that
fisheries management is a complex and evolving policy area, with various trade-offs and
challenges involved in balancing competing objectives. When fisheries are managed
sustainably, they provide a low impact, low emissions, reusable source of food production.

While Individual Transferable Quota (ITQ) systems do not solve all the challenges that
can arise in fisheries management, they remain best practice for addressing the
competing environmental, economic, and social considerations in the fishing sector. With
careful monitoring and continuous evidence-based improvement, ITQ systems can be
further optimised to support sustainable and equitable management of our fisheries
resources for the benefit of present and future generations. By investing in research and
innovation, and the ongoing reviews of the Commonwealth’s Fisheries Harvest Strategy
Policy 2018 and Fisheries Bycatch Policy 2018, we can ensure that these systems are
applied to their full potential while taking into account the concerns of stakeholders and
the need for collaboration among all parties involved.

The government's response (below) addresses the seven recommendations outlined in the
Senate Committee's majority report, as well as the ten recommendations outlined in the
Australian Greens’ additional comments.

Response — Majority Report

Recommendation 1

The committee recommends that the Australian Government reviews the Fisheries
Management Act 1991, and associated regulations and guidelines, to ensure that their
aims align with the objective that fisheries are managed sustainably and in a way that
maximises economic and social returns to the Australian community. The review should
consider:

the adequacy of current cost recovery fees and licencing charges;
whether maximum economic yield (MEY) remains the preferred measure for

setting total allowable catches (TACs);

employment outcomes of the quota system and whether these align with
government and community priorities.

the performance of modified quota systems and royalty schemes that have been
implemented in international jurisdictions, and their applicability in Commonwealth
fisheries; and

how the current resource sharing model can incorporate recreational and
customary fishing into the fisheries management framework.

esponse
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.

The government is reviewing the Commonwealth Fisheries Harvest Strategy Policy 2018
(the Harvest Strategy Policy) and the Commonwealth Fisheries Bycatch Policy (the Bycatch
Policy). These reviews will consider some of the recommended areas for review. For
example, the Harvest Strategy Policy considers methods for setting Total Allowable
Catches. The Government will continue to monitor the efficacy of the Fisheries Management
Act 19917 in the context of these reviews.

Also relevant to the recommendation is:

e The Australian Fisheries Management Authority (AFMA) undertakes regular reviews
of its cost recovery framework in line with the Department of Finance Cost Recovery

Guidelines: https:/Awww.afma.gov.au/corporate-and-reports/afmas-cost-recovery-

implementation-statement-2022-23.
e The Commonwealth Resource Sharing Framework 2020 recognises recreational

and customary fishing in developing and implementing resource sharing
arrangements. The framework can be found at the following link

agriculture.gov.au/agriculture-land/fisheries/domestic/resource-sharing.

Recommendation 2

The committee recommends that the Australian Government builds on its establishment
of the Commonwealth fisheries resources sharing framework to make publicly owned

quota available for small and lease fishers, community and First Nations fishers, and other
stakeholder groups.

esponse
The Australian Government does not support this recommendation.
There is no publicly owned quota in Commonwealth fisheries.

In the case of small, lease and community fishers, for the government to make quota
available for these groups it would be required to purchase existing quota. This would
influence overall prices and potentially put existing small to medium operators at a
disadvantage. It may also create incentives for small operators to sell existing quota, only
to compete for discounted government leases.

In relation to First Nations fishers, the Commonwealth Resource Sharing Framework 2020
provides that in developing and implementing resource sharing arrangements, the Australian
government will support arrangements that increase First Nations involvement in fisheries
businesses and related commercial opportunities. For example, assisting First Nations
businesses to become commercial-ready or to purchase quota themselves.

The committee recommends that the Australian Fisheries Management
Authority increases the transparency of quota holdings by

improving the format and readability of current registers to more clearly
identify quota holders;

improving communication with industry around existing registers; and

developing a more robust register of quota for sale, or a trading platform, to better
connect sellers with potential buyers.

The Australian Government agrees in part with this recommendation.

The Fisheries Management Act 1991, Fisheries Administration Act 1991 and supporting
Regulations and Management Plans detail the requirements of quota registers. AFMA's
current registers, including the agency's supporting information technology infrastructure, are
structured to meet these requirements.

AFMA has recently commenced a process to enhance and improve its data systems,
including its public-facing registers. This will provide an opportunity to consult with affected
stakeholders on improving these systems. The recommendations around format, readability
and communication will be considered in the context of this work.

AFMA has recently commenced publishing average quota trade price data on the AFMA web
site. Possessing and publishing (in summary form) quota price information can improve
flexibility and efficiency of the quota market and benefit operators. Clear and transparent

price signals can make trading easier and provide buyers and sellers more confidence in the
market.

The government does not agree with the recommendation that AFMA develop a register of
quota for sale or that AFMA be more closely involved in quota trading. Commercial
transactions are a matter for the private sector and several brokers already provide these
services to the industry.

Recommendation 4

The committee recommends that the Department of the Treasury works across

government portfolios and agencies to ensure that there is transparency about the
actual level of foreign ownership of Commonwealth fisheries quota.

esponse
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.

The government publishes a quarterly report on foreign investment screening data, the most
recent report was published on 8 February 2024 for the 1 July —- 30 September 2023 period.
The quarterly report was introduced in response to the evaluation of the 2021 foreign
investment reforms which found that regular performance reporting would improve the
transparency of foreign investment regulation in Australia.

The report breaks down screening data into sectors, including “Agriculture, Forestry and
Fishing” which recorded 30 approved investment proposals (to the value of $1.0 billion) in
the 1 July - 30 September quarter and 45 approved investment proposals (to the value of
$1.5 billion) in the 1 April — 30 June 2023 period.

The new Register of Foreign Ownership of Australian Assets increases transparency of
foreign investment in Australia by creating obligations on foreign persons to notify for an
increased number of interests in different asset-types. For more information, please see the
response to Australian Greens Recommendation 9.

The committee recommends that the Australian Government asks the Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission to inquire into current competition issues in the

fisheries quota system.

The Australian Government notes this recommendation.

Fishers are subject to prohibitions on anti-competitive conduct in the Competition and
Consumer Act 2010, and the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission is currently
investigating alleged breaches of these prohibitions in the fisheries sector.

Recommendation 6

The committee recommends that the Australian Government asks the Regional Investment

Corporation to establish a loan facility for small and lease fishers to assist with the
purchase of quota, vessels, and equipment in Commonwealth-managed fisheries.

esponse
The Australian Government does not support this recommendation.

The Regional Investment Corporation was established to deliver the Commonwealth’s farm
business concessional loans scheme (previously delivered by states and territories) in a
nationally consistent manner. The loans are targeted at farm businesses in financial need
who are financially viable in the long term, have the capacity to repay the loan, have existing
commercial debt and are able to provide sufficient and satisfactory security.

Further key eligibility criteria require the farm business to be involved within the agricultural,
horticultural, pastoral, beekeeping (apicultural) or aquacultural industries and undertake all
primary production aspects of the business wholly within Australia.

The RIC completed a review of its farm business definition in 2022. This included
consultation to understand whether its current farm business definition was fit for purpose
and reflective of industry needs. The review’s outcome did not extend the farm business
definition to wild catch fishers on the basis that the sector harvests a common resource
rather than having ownership of a stock being cultivated. This approach to eligibility aligns
with other government support measures such as the Farm Household Allowance program.

Further information is available at ric.gov.au/eligible-industries.

ecommendation

The committee recommends that the Australian Government undertakes an independent

stock assessment of the Spanish Mackerel fishery.

The Australian Government does not support this recommendation.

There are four principal commercial fisheries for this species, managed by Queensland, the
Northern Territory, Western Australia and The Torres Straight Protected Zone Joint
Authority respectively. Responsibility for management and stock assessment sits with each
relevant management authority.

In relation to general research needs, the Fisheries Research and Development Corporation
is funding a project (project code 2021-111) to address uncertainties in the methodology of
Spanish Mackerel stock assessment.

Response — Additional recommendations by the Australian Greens

Australian Greens - Recommendation 1

The committee recommends the Australian Government adopts and implements
Recommendations 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 12 from the 2012 Review of Commonwealth

Fisheries: Legislation, Policy and Management (Borthwick Review), which propose
changes to fisheries legislation to give equal weight to addressing fisheries ecosystem
effects, bycatch and discard issues.

esponse
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.

Recommendation 3 of the 2012 Borthwick Review recommends amendments be made to
the objectives of the Fisheries Management Act 19917 to explicitly require AFMA to give
equal attention to three ‘pillars’: harvest strategy matters, bycatch and discard matters, and
ecosystem impacts. In addition, the Borthwick Review notes that such amendments should
make it explicit that equal attention does not always mean equal outcomes, and trade-offs
may apply where there is conflict between the three pillars. This is reflected in the other
recommendations of the Borthwick Review.

The current reviews of the Harvest Strategy Policy and Bycatch Policy are an opportunity to
consider more explicit guidance on incorporating ecosystem impacts into fisheries
management decision making. As noted in the response to Recommendation 1 of the
Committee Report, the Australian Government will continue to monitor the efficacy of the
Fisheries Management Act 1997 in the context of this review.

The committee recommends that the Australian Government formally adopts and
implements Recommendation 7 of the 2012 Review of Commonwealth Fisheries:
Legislation, Policy and Management (Borthwick Review):

e AFMA needs to introduce more transparency and accessibility into its consultation
and decision-making processes.

Ahead of Commission decisions, in addition to Management Advisory Committee
(MAC) and Resource Assessment Group (RAG) processes, AFMA should seek
opportunities to prepare issues/options papers on key issues, thereby tapping into

broader ranges of input from commercial and recreational fishers, scientists,
NGOs and the general public.

The decisions of the Commission, including the reasons for decisions, should be
more readily available to the public.

There is no good reason for a statutory requirement for the Commission to meet
with the peak industry body following the tabling of a report on AFMA's operations
in Parliament and this requirement should be removed from the FAA.

The Australian Government notes this recommendation.

AFMA has in place comprehensive and inclusive consultative processes plus accountability
measures such as publishing outcomes of each Commission meeting and regular
correspondence to industry bodies to explain more detailed rationale behind the
Commission's decisions. Under the Fisheries Administration Act 1991, AFMA is also
required to hold an annual public meeting, now held in a hybrid form (online and in-person)
to facilitate greater attendance and open to members of the public and stakeholders.

As a matter of good governance, AFMA has recently commissioned a review of its key
consultative mechanisms — that is, resource assessment groups and management
advisory committees — to ascertain whether the current structures continue to be
appropriate in providing advice and recommendations to AFMA and its Commission and
any areas where these could be improved.

Most decisions taken by AFMA are operational in nature and based on well-established
legislation and government policy (such as the Harvest Strategy Policy). As such, AFMA
considers that the current consultative mechanisms are appropriate and proportionate.
Introducing additional levels of consultation would be unlikely to offer additional value but
would come at a cost in terms of timeliness of decisions and increased levies on industry.
Beyond these operational decisions, when AFMA reviews its existing policies and
establishes new ones, it undertakes extensive consultation, including through its web page

afma.gov.au/consultations.

Decisions of the AFMA Commission are distributed via the AFMA website and are
available at afma.gov.au/commission-meeting-summaries.

Australian Greens - Recommendation 3

he committee recommends that the Australian Government develops a formal and
ransparent process to incorporate the advice and expertise of fisheries ecologists into
isheries management plans, the setting of total allowable catches (TACs), and
development of harvest strategies.

esponse
The Australian Government agrees in part with this recommendation.

The current review of the Harvest Strategy Policy is an opportunity to consider more
explicit guidance on incorporation of broader ecosystem considerations into fisheries
management decision making, including the setting of total allowable catches.

AFMA routinely commissions research that either incorporates or focuses on ecological
risks; most recently, research led by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research
Organisation on the development of multi-species harvest strategies has included
comprehensive analysis of ecosystem linkages and impacts to better account for these in
the setting of total allowable catches for individual species.

AFMA’s advisory groups include a range of scientists, including some with marine ecological
expertise, and appointment of individual experts is based on the needs of the particular
fishery. As already noted, AFMA has recently commissioned a review of its main
consultative groups, which is expected to identify any gaps in existing expertise and advice.

Australian Greens - Recommendation 4

As part of the Australian Fisheries Management Authority's (AFMA) upcoming assessment

of its Resource Assessment Groups, AFMA should consider the inclusion of fisheries
ecologists on these committees.

esponse
The Australian Government agrees with this recommendation.

AFMA commissioned a review of its Management Advisory Committees and Resource
Assessment Groups during 2022/2023. The review made no explicit recommendation on
including fisheries ecologist members on committees, however AFMA has already put in
place such a member on one of its committees and will continue to do so on other
committees where applicable.

Australian

he committee recommends that the Australian Government considers the failure of ITQ
and other management tools to sustainably manage the South East Trawl Fishery as part
of its statutory ten-year review of the South East Bioregional Network, looking at:

e the benefits of upgrading green (no take) zones in the existing Marine
Park Network; and

the benefits of establishing new Marine Parks as an insurance against climate
change uncertainties and to assist existing ecosystems, habitats and fisheries to
recover.

The Australian Government notes this recommendation.

Newly available science tells us the decline and non-recovery of several species in the
South East Trawl Fishery has been driven by external factors such as climate change and is
not caused by current catch levels. AFMA responded to these reduced stock levels with
significant area closures and reductions in Total Allowable Catches to allow rebuilding.

This adaptive fisheries management response, along with ongoing monitoring, review and
further adaptation if required, pursues the sustainability objectives in the Fisheries
Management Act 1991.

Australian Marine Parks have different objectives of protecting and conserving biodiversity
and supporting compatible ecologically sustainable use through a system of marine
protected areas that is comprehensive, adequate and representative.

The Director of National Parks is undertaking the statutory ten-year review of the South-
east Marine Parks Network Management Plan 2013-2023. The government has committed
to undertaking statutory reviews in a timely and consultative manner, with any changes to
park management arrangements considered on the basis of science and stakeholder
consultation.

Australian Greens - Recommendation 6

The committee recommends that the Australian Government surveys and publishes

measures of net economic returns (NER) for those Commonwealth fisheries not currently
surveyed, and adopts other annual public reporting metrics on economic returns, such as
the percentage of public rent for all Commonwealth fisheries.

esponse
The Australian Government agrees in part with this recommendation.

The Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics and Sciences (ABARES)
routinely conducts economic surveys of several of the larger value Commonwealth fisheries.
Using data from these surveys, ABARES calculates and publishes measures of economic
performance, including net economic returns and productivity. For lower value fisheries
and/or for fisheries with a small number of boats, conducting economic surveys is typically
not feasible. This is due to confidentiality issues associated with small sample sizes given
the commercial nature of the data. However, as part of its annual assessments in the
Fishery Status Reports, ABARES uses available information to assess the economic
performance of each Commonwealth fishery. For lower value fisheries, this typically
includes information on latency of quota/fishing permits, management costs and a
qualitative assessment of the management tools in place.

The committee recommends that the Fisheries Research and Development Corporation
supports a research project to build on work submitted by the University of Tasmania's
Institute for Marine and Antarctic Studies providing international examples of resource

rents, or access payment schemes, and their suitability to Commonwealth fisheries.
The project should lead to a publicly available report providing detailed assessments for
individual Commonwealth fisheries.

The Australian Government agrees in part with this recommendation.

FRDC is funding a project that addresses a significant part of this recommendation with
the Institute of Marine and Antarctic Studies (Utas) (FRDC project code 2020-029
“Improving performance of ITQ fisheries”). The Project Objectives are as follows:

e Assess the effects of adoption and ongoing management of Individual Transferable
Quotas including consequences that flow from Individual Transferable Quotas and
the effects of the adoption on specific performance indicators.

e Develop adaptive management options for existing Individual Transferable Quotas
that will assist in managing the impact of unintended and unwanted consequences.

e Better support managers in planning for the mitigation and management of
unintended and unwanted consequences over time, including the cost of
implementing change.

e Provide options to fishery managers and stakeholders to assist in the adjustment
of existing fisheries management under Individual Transferable Quotas to avoid, or
mitigate, unintended and unwanted consequences and/or enhance unintended but
positive consequences.

The outcomes of this research project will assist in any future consideration of [TQ
frameworks for Commonwealth fisheries.

Australian Greens - Recommendation 8

The committee recommends that the Australian Government seeks legal advice and
considers adopting amendments to the Fisheries Management Act 1991 and Fisheries
Administration Act 1991 that, as in Western Australia's Fish Resource Management Act

1994, enables the control of foreign interests in Commonwealth fishing, and provides the
Fisheries Minister with the ability to issue guidelines, bans or caps relating to foreign
persons holding, controlling or having an interest in authorisations (quota holdings).

esponse
The Australian Government does not support this recommendation.

The government is committed to ensuring that foreign investment into Australia remains in
our national interest and does not pose risks to our national security. We welcome foreign
investment and note its importance for growth, innovation and the creation of skilled jobs,
and its contribution to the prosperity of businesses, communities and the Australian
economy.

The committee recommends that the Department of the Treasury works across
government portfolios and agencies to establish a register of foreign and non-fishing

interests which reports on the actual level of foreign and non-fishing ownership of
Commonwealth fisheries quota, and any barriers to transparency.

Response
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
There is an existing register that tracks foreign ownership in land and water.

The Register of Foreign Ownership of Agricultural Land and the Register of Foreign
Ownership of Water Entitlements were incorporated into the Register of Foreign
Ownership of Australian Assets (RFOAA) on 1 July 2023.

Previous associated reports from these registers were released annually. RFOOA reports
are required to be published as soon as practicable after 30 June every year.

The new Register amalgamates and expands existing registers administered by the ATO,
providing a streamlined experience for foreign investors to manage their investment affairs,
supports compliance with Australia’s foreign investment framework and increases the
government's visibility of foreign investments made in Australia.

it increases visibility on foreign ownership by creating additional obligations to notify of a
foreign acquisition of Australian assets through expanded notification requirements to
include all types of Australian land, as well as certain tenements, business assets and
securities.

Australian Greens - Recommendation 10

he committee recommends that the Australian Government explores options to acquire
quota, and make this publicly owned quota available for divers, small and lease fishers,
ommunity and First Nations fishers, and other stakeholder groups.

esponse
The Australian Government does not support this recommendation.

See response to Recommendation 2 of the Committee Report.
