Australian Government response to the Legal and
Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee report:
Criminal Code Amendment (Prohibition of Nazi Symbols)
Bill 2023
March 2024
Recommendation Government Response
Committee Report
1 The committee recommends that the bill not Noted.
be passed.
On 14 June 2023, the Government introduced the Counter-Terrorism Legislation
Amendment (Prohibited Hate Symbols and Other Measures) Bill 2023. The Bill (now
2 The committee recommends that the
Act) passed both houses of parliament on 6 December 2023, and received Royal Assent
government considers introducing its own
on 11 December 2023.
bill as a matter of urgency, taking into
consideration the issues raised above.
The Act amended the Criminal Code Act 1995 (Criminal Code) to establish new criminal
Dissenting Report
offences for the public display of prohibited Nazi and terrorist organisation symbols and
1 That the Bill be passed with an amendment
publicly performing the Nazi salute; and trading in goods that bear a prohibited symbol.
providing that a review be undertaken
following its operation for an appropriate
The Act also amended the Criminal Code to:
period.
• establish new criminal offences for using a carriage service for violent extremist
2 If the Government wishes to propose its own
material; and possessing or controlling violent extremist material obtained or
Bill, then such a Bill should be prepared as a
accessed using a carriage service.
matter of urgency (as per recommendation 2
• expand the offence of advocating terrorism in section 80.2C of the Criminal Code
of the Majority Report), taking into account
to include instructing on the doing of a terrorist act and praising the doing of a
the submissions made as part of this enquiry
terrorist act in specified circumstances; and increase the maximum penalty for the
process.
advocating terrorism offence from 5 to 7 years imprisonment.
• remove the sunsetting requirement for instruments which list terrorist
organisations and bolster safeguards.
2
