Australian Government Response to the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security Report:
Advisory Report on the Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation Amendment Bill 2023
SEPTEMBER 2023
Australian Government Response to the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security Report
Advisory Report on the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill 2023
The Government thanks the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security
(‘Committee’) for its review of the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (‘ASIO’)
Amendment Bill 2023 (‘the Bill’).
The Government provides the following responses to the Committee’s recommendations
Recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Explanatory Memorandum for the Australian
Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill 2023 be amended or a supplementary
Explanatory Memorandum presented specifying that notwithstanding the Bill’s authority to
delegate functions and powers to ASIO affiliates, human sources or agents will not be used
to undertake security vetting.
The Government accepts the Committee’s recommendation.
Amendment to the Bill’s Explanatory Memorandum
The Government prepared and presented to the House a replacement Explanatory
Memorandum for the Bill that implemented Recommendation 1. The replacement
Explanatory Memorandum specified that notwithstanding the Bill’s authority to delegate
functions and powers to ASIO affiliates, ASIO’s human sources or agents will not be
involved in the undertaking of security vetting.
A copy of the replacement Explanatory Memorandum is attached.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that following implementation of the recommendation in this
report, the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Bill 2023 be passed
by Parliament.
The Government accepts the Committee’s recommendation. The Bill passed both Houses of
Parliament on 22 June 2023 and received royal assent on 28 June 2023. The Australian
Security Intelligence Organisation Amendment Act 2023 commenced on 1 July 2023.
