Australian Government response to the
Senate Community Affairs References Committee report:
Review of legislative instruments made under Part 3AA or Part 3B of the Social Security
(Administration) Act 1999 – Review 1
May 2024
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the Senate Community Affairs References Committee’s
(the Committee’s) report titled Review of legislative instruments made under Part 3AA or Part
3B of the Social Security (Administration) Act 1999 – Review 1 (Review 1).
The Government notes this is the first such review by the Committee since the passage of the
Social Security (Administration) Amendment (Income Management Reform) Act 2023, which
inserted a requirement that the Committee review of any legislative instrument made under Part
3AA or Part 3B of the Social Security (Administration) Act 1999 (the Administration Act).
The review examined the following six legislative instruments, made for the purposes of Part
3AA or Part 3B of the Administration Act:
• Instruments made on 1 September 2023 for the purposes of Part 3AA of the Act (eIM):
− Social Security (Administration) (Enhanced Income Management Regime –
State Referrals) Determination 2023;
− Social Security (Administration) (Enhanced Income Management Regime –
Commonwealth Referrals and Exemptions) Determination 2023; and
− Social Security (Administration) (Enhanced Income Management Regime –
Volunteers) Determination 2023.
• Instruments made on 14 September 2023 for the purposes of Part 3B of the Act (IM):
− Social Security (Administration) (Declared Child Protection State – New South
Wales, Queensland, South Australia and Victoria) Determination 2023;
− Social Security (Administration) (Recognised State or Territory – Northern
Territory) Determination 2023; and
− Social Security (Administration) (Specified Income Management Territory –
Northern Territory) Instrument 2023.
2
Review of legislative instruments made under Part 3AA or Part 3B of the
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999 – Review 1
Recommendations made by the Committee
Recommendation 1
1) The committee recommends that for any future legislative instruments made
under Part 3B or Part 3AA of the Administration Act, the Australian
Government give consideration to:
a) undertake genuine consultation;
b) provide adequate and relevant explanatory material to Parliament to enable
appropriate scrutiny; and
c) provide a detailed report on the consultation process and outcomes
regarding the proposed Determinations.
Noted
The Government notes the recommendation. We continue to consult with affected
communities on the future of Income Management and will give consideration to
appropriate consultation for any future legislative instruments.
Consultation has been ongoing with First Nations people and leaders, communities,
participants and key stakeholders since June 2023. The community consultation phase
commenced in November 2023. Through to 14 March 2024, the Department of Social
Services (the Department) has consulted with approximately 3,200 community members in
57 locations in the Northern Territory.
The Department has partnered with ETM Perspectives (ETMP), an Indigenous-led
company, to ensure consultation with communities is culturally sensitive and meets the
needs of communities. ETMP is leveraging existing local knowledge and relationships with
communities to ensure the approach is respectful and reflective of community requirements.
The Government will continue to meet its obligations under the Administration Act and the
Legislation Act 2003, including providing detail on the consultation process and outcomes
within explanatory material.
3
Additional Comments
Australian Greens
Recommendation 1
The Australian Government immediately abolish all forms of compulsory income
management and fund place-based, community-driven support services developed
in collaboration with First Nations-controlled organisations and people.
Not Supported
The Government has heard from First Nations people, leaders and communities that they
want a measured approach to reforming Income Management. Further, decisions that impact
First Nations people must be made in partnership with them, and the Government has
committed to ensuring First Nations people are involved in decisions which affect them.
The Government is committed to genuine consultation before decisions on the future of
Income Management are made.
Coalition Senators
Recommendation 2
The Australian Government legislates the Coalition’s Cashless Debit Card Scheme.
Not Supported
The Government delivered on its election commitment to abolish the Cashless Debit Card in
the Social Security (Administration) Amendment (Repeal of Cashless Debit Card and Other
Measures) Act 2022.
Recommendation 3
In the absence of the Coalition’s Cashless Debit Card Scheme, the current
legislative instruments remain in effect.
Supported
4
