Australian Government response to the
Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and
Trade report:
Strengthening Australia’s Relationships in the Pacific
May 2024
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the opportunity to respond to the report of the Joint
Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade: Foreign Affairs and Aid Sub-
committee (the Sub-committee), on its inquiry into strengthening Australia’s relationships
with the Pacific.
The Government has carefully considered the report and agrees, fully, in principle or
partially, with the majority of recommendations made by the Sub-committee. The
Government appreciates the work of the Sub-committee and also recognises the valuable
contributions made to the inquiry by communities, universities, think tanks, and Pacific
peoples.
Australia sees the Pacific as family. Our relationships with Pacific island countries are long-
standing and enduring, based on true partnership, respect, and friendship. These relationships
are central to our national interest and national identity. Our priority is to ensure the Blue
Pacific remains peaceful, prosperous, and equipped to respond to the challenges of our time.
Ministers have travelled to every Pacific Islands Forum member since taking office to renew
our partnerships and listen to Pacific priorities. The Australian Government is delivering a
whole-of-government package of support to the Pacific, harnessing all our national assets to
respond to the Pacific priorities that we have heard.
As climate change continues to threaten Pacific communities, Australia is taking a regional
approach to humanitarian relief and strengthening support for disaster preparedness, working
closely with the Pacific to build resilience and support Pacific responses to crises. We are
delivering real action on climate change, at home and in partnership with the Pacific, and
working together to amplify Pacific voices, including by bidding to co-host the 31st United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Conference in 2026 with the Pacific.
The Government pledged to bring new energy and resources to the Pacific, to help build a
stronger Pacific family. The October 2022-23 Budget reinforced our commitment with more
action:
• delivering an additional $900 million over four years in Official Development
Assistance, to support the Pacific’s development, economic, health, education, social
and climate priorities
• advancing Pacific security priorities, including upgrading aerial surveillance under the
Pacific Maritime Security Program to tackle illegal, unreported and unregulated
fishing, and increasing practical cooperation between Pacific and Australian security
forces
• expanding the Australian Broadcasting Corporation’s (ABC) services and
partnerships in the region, to ensure more Australian voices are heard across the
region
• increasing the Australian Infrastructure Financing Facility for the Pacific (AIFFP)
from $3.5 billion to $4 billion to support grant and loan packages to deliver quality,
climate resilient transformational infrastructure in response to partner Government
priorities
• expanding and improving the Pacific Australia Labour Mobility (PALM) scheme and
creating a new Pacific Engagement Visa for up to 3,000 nationals of Pacific island
countries and Timor-Leste each year to permanently migrate to Australia.
In the 2023-24 Budget, the Government announced a further package of support to the
Pacific across 13 government agencies (around $1.9 billion over five years) to deepen our
connections, boost our investment in Pacific regional architecture and advance Pacific peace
and security. This includes:
• continuing to expand and improve PALM, in line with Pacific aspirations and the
needs of Australian businesses, enhancing conditions and better supporting workers,
including through skills development
• expanding access to Australian media content and boosting media connections in the
region under the Indo-Pacific Broadcasting Strategy, elevating Pacific voices and
stories
• supporting faster and more efficient visa service delivery for visa applicants from
Pacific island countries
• advancing Pacific regionalism through investment in regional architecture to support
the Pacific family and to help deliver the 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent
• delivering on bilateral security treaty commitments and deepening our security, law
enforcement and criminal justice partnerships, including through investments in cyber
resilience, national security capabilities and maritime security.
The Government thanks the Sub-Committee for its work in preparing this report and
considering the submissions.
Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that Australia builds on the Partnerships for Recovery to
lead a large-scale, multi-year post-COVID-19 aid and recovery package within the
Pacific islands region, focussing on transformative public investment through grants
and concessional lending.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation.
Australia has been increasing support to respond to the evolving fiscal, economic and
social challenges facing the Pacific and Timor-Leste.
Australia will continue to support Pacific countries to mitigate the ongoing economic
impacts of the COVID-19 crisis. The Government is increasing Australia’s ODA to the
Pacific and Timor-Leste by $900 million over four years from 2022-23 and will work in
partnership with individual countries to shape priorities. Our support includes a
strengthened focus on climate adaptation and resilience, water, sanitation, and hygiene,
gender equality, education, health, and support for people with disability, in line with the
Government’s election commitments.
Australia will be providing additional fiscal support as part of AUD 1.9 billion in funding
for the Pacific and Timor-Leste in 2022-23 to help address the economic and social costs of
the pandemic in the region. This support ensures essential services, including health,
education and social protection continues, and vital transport corridors stay open.
The Australian Infrastructure Financing Facility for the Pacific (AIFFP) forms an important
part of Australia’s COVID-19 recovery efforts in the region by partnering with
governments and the private sector in the Pacific and Timor-Leste to provide financing for
high quality, transformational infrastructure.
The AIFFP provides concessional financing including both loans and grants to finance
infrastructure projects that contribute to the overall stability and economic prosperity of the
Pacific and Timor-Leste. AIFFP only provides grants in countries where loans are not
suitable due to debt concerns.
In providing sovereign loans, the AIFFP, at a minimum, ensures its financing is consistent
with Australia’s international obligations on debt sustainability and tailored to reflect a
country’s specific debt circumstances.
To date, the Government has agreed to a total of $1.3 billion in financing for 17 projects in
ten countries, including:
• major investments in PNG’s ports, roads and electricity sector;
• the Tina River transmission line in Solomon Islands;
• investments in Fiji’s roads and airports;
• the East Micronesia Cable, which will connect FSM, Kiribati and Nauru;
• the rehabilitation of Nauru Airport;
• an undersea ICT cable and a solar farm in Palau; and,
• supporting the redevelopment of Dili Airport in Timor-Leste.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends the Australian Government:
• pursue steps to scale-up the program, better support career development, and
provide pathways for permanent residency, akin to those being developed for the
Agriculture Visa Scheme; and
• explicitly recognise the relationship building and cultural exchange elements of
the Pacific Australia Labour Mobility Scheme in its design and promotion.
Response:
The Government in-principle accepts this recommendation.
An expanded Pacific Australia Labour Mobility (PALM) scheme is central to the
Government’s engagement with the Pacific region. It develops skills, addresses youth
unemployment, supports economic integration of our region and binds our societies
together.
The Government is improving and expanding the PALM scheme through an ambitious
reform agenda to further enhance conditions for workers on the ground. The PALM
scheme makes a significant contribution to the Australian economy. Economic modelling
commissioned by DFAT estimated that as at December 2022, PALM scheme long-term
workers generated $403.5 million in profits for their employers; have paid $51.9 million in
income tax and $23.3 million in superannuation tax; and – with their employers – have
contributed $1.3 billion to Australia’s gross domestic product.
These reforms will make the scheme more attractive to employers facing workforce
shortages and to Pacific workers interested in participating in the scheme. This includes:
• increasing the number of PALM workers in Australia;
• strengthening the Government’s oversight of domestic operations which will
enhance conditions and better protect and support workers to improve their
experience in Australia;
• enabling employers to sponsor long-term workers to bring their families to
Australia, initially for 200 families. This will include access to additional family
assistance payments (Family Tax Benefit and Child Care Subsidy) and Medicare to
ensure families have a positive experience and are supported while they raise their
children in Australia;
• embedding skills development by providing additional training places for PALM
scheme workers, and improved career pathways;
• supporting more workers to access their superannuation savings for when they
return home;
• reimbursing employers for upfront travel costs that cannot be recouped from
seasonal workers through no fault of the employer, to reduce the burden of upfront
costs on employers; and,
• relocating the Australian Agriculture Visa (AAV) program under the PALM
scheme by adjusting the scheme’s settings to reflect key features of the AAV.
The Government is also committed to reducing red tape for employers and to better
supporting smaller growers’ participation in the scheme, while also improving conditions
for workers and implementing all the recommendations of the Migrant Worker Taskforce.
This will ensure Pacific and Timor-Leste workers value their experience in Australia and
continue to benefit from the program. The Government is consulting closely with Pacific
island countries and Timor-Leste to understand their perspectives on labour mobility and
to help shape and implement the reforms.
Planned improvements to the scheme will increase opportunities for workers to access
training and skills development and provide a pathway for skilled migration. The PALM
scheme Skills Development Program provides workers from the Pacific and Timor-Leste
with access to training including Certificate I, II and III, benefitting workers and
employers by improving technical abilities and increasing business productivity. This
provides a potential pathway for skilled migration as employers may choose to sponsor
eligible workers under the Temporary Skill Shortages visa in the future.
The Government has also committed to boosting Pacific permanent migration to Australia
by establishing a new Pacific Engagement Visa (PEV) for citizens of the Pacific and
Timor-Leste, commencing in 2024. Up to 3,000 visas will be allocated annually by a ballot
process, with those selected from the ballot invited to apply for permanent residency
Applicants must secure a formal job offer in Australia prior to the granting of a visa.
Former PALM scheme participants, and PALM workers in Australia on valid temporary
visas will be eligible to register for the PEV ballot when applications open. Any further
pathways for PALM workers would require close consultation with Pacific island
countries and Timor-Leste governments.
The Government recognises the critical role that workers play in building people-to-people
links between Australia and Pacific island countries. Initiatives such as the Community
Connections program ensure workers are connected to church, diaspora, sports and other
community groups that provide opportunities to create positive social networks. The
Government will continue to seek opportunities to tell the positive story of the PALM
scheme and amplify cultural exchanges to foster deeper connections with the Pacific
family.
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that support for climate change mitigation and adaptation
continue to be a high priority in Australia’s immediate regional assistance program.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Australian Government recognises that climate change is the single greatest threat to
the livelihoods, security and wellbeing of the peoples of the Pacific and an urgent global
challenge.
The Government’s climate engagement aims to strengthen Pacific resilience, reinforce
sovereignty and help sustain the Pacific’s tradition of global leadership on climate
change. The Government has committed, as part of the International Development Policy,
to ensure that 50 per cent of all new bilateral and regional investments valued at more than
$3 million will have a climate outcome by 2024-25, increasing to 80 per cent by 2028.
The Government has also increased ODA to the region by $900 million over four years,
including at least $250 million in new funding for climate change adaptation and resilience
in the Pacific. Examples of these programs include the Pacific led Weather Ready Pacific
initiative to enhance crucial early warning systems and an additional $10 million from
Australia to help rebuild schools in Fiji’s Northern Division that were devastated by
tropical cyclones in 2020 and 2021.
At the 52nd Meeting of the Pacific Islands Forum, Australia announced a package of
climate assistance for the region, including at least $350 million in climate resilient
infrastructure, with at least $75 million in off grid and community scale renewable energy
in remote and rural parts of the Pacific. Australia also announced a foundational
commitment to the Pacific Resilience Facility – a Pacific-led and managed initiative to
support locally led, small scale climate and disaster resilience projects. The scale of this
$100 million commitment was confirmed at COP28.
At COP26, Australia increased its pledge to spend $700 million over five years (2020-21 to
2024-25) to strengthen climate change and disaster resilience in the Pacific and is set to
exceed this commitment. This builds on Australia’s previous funding to the Pacific for
climate and disaster resilience of $408 million (2015-16 to 2019-20).
On 5 November 2022, Australia formally announced it would bid to co-host COP31 in
2026 in partnership with the Pacific, which was agreed by PIF leaders in June 2022. We
are committed to elevating the importance of climate action and Pacific priorities on the
global stage.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that to enable program certainty, and retain and attract
expertise, that the Australian Government consider providing a dedicated budgeted line
item to the Federal Court of Australia to directly deliver the successful judicial capacity
programs in the Pacific Islands region.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
Reflecting the PIF Leaders’ priorities as articulated in the 2050 Strategy for the Blue
Pacific Continent, Australia is committed to embracing good governance and
strengthening the full observance of democratic principles and values in the Pacific. Our
bilateral and regional initiatives cover a broad range of support, including economic
governance and growth, gender and social inclusion, public sector reform, support for civil
society, legal and judicial development, and elections.
In particular, the Attorney-General’s Department and portfolio has well-developed
programs supporting the law and justice sector in the Pacific, with particular focus on law
enforcement and criminal justice partnerships. The Attorney-General’s Department
supports Pacific regional partners to improve their capacity to address shared criminal law
and justice priorities through training and mentoring Pacific officials, working in
partnership on bilateral and regional legal policy and legislative reform projects and by
enhancing regional collaboration on law and justice issues, particularly through the
longstanding involvement in the Pacific Islands Law Officers’ Network (PILON).
In March 2022, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade agreed to provide around $3
million over three years to the Federal Court of Australia, to provide targeted judicial
support to Pacific judicial and court officers, to complement the broader judicial
strengthening work currently funded by the New Zealand Government.
Recognising the absorptive capacity constraints within the region, it is important that any
new judicial strengthening support complements existing efforts, fits in with bilateral
partner priorities, and addresses specific needs and gaps.
New Zealand has been the lead funder of Pacific regional judiciary strengthening support
since 2010, and its new Pacific Justice Sector Programme (PJSP) (NZ$11.35 million over
five years) is continuing to support the development of accessible, fair, responsive and
efficient justice systems in the region. The new PJSP continues to provide the same
assistance to Pacific judicial and court officers as the previous regional support programs:
the Pacific Judicial Strengthening Initiative, which was administered by the Federal Court
of Australia, and the Judicial Pacific Participation Fund, which was administered by the
New Zealand Institute of Judicial Studies (Te Kura Kaiwhakawā).
The provision of any additional judicial strengthening funding would need to be carefully
considered to ensure it did not duplicate existing assistance or place an additional burden
on partners.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends the Australian Government considers creating a dedicated
Pacific component within Australia’s permanent migration intake, similar to the New
Zealand model.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Australian Government will strengthen people-to-people links and deepen ties with the
Pacific family by encouraging migration to Australia through the establishment of the
PEV. The PEV will grow the Pacific and Timor-Leste diasporas in Australia and encourage
greater cultural, business, and educational exchange.
The PEV is a substantive expression of the special relationship Australia has with Pacific
island countries and Timor-Leste helping to address the underrepresentation of these
countries in in Australia’s permanent migration program. Up to 3,000 visas, inclusive of
partners and dependent children, will be allocated annually. Applicants will be required to
meet conditions for the grant of the visa including securing employment in Australia and
meeting English language, health, character and age requirements. The Government has
been consulting extensively with Pacific partners and is listening to ensure the program
meets shared needs and priorities in support of a peaceful, prosperous and resilient Pacific
region.
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends the Australian Government:
• start dialogue with Pacific island countries about compacts of association
considerations; and
• evaluate bold ideas for longer term Pacific region ‘deep integration’ including
the creation of a significant compact of free association with countries in the
Pacific island region—in particular microstates most vulnerable to climate
change instability.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government is working closely with our Pacific partners on ways to
deepen links and strengthen regional and bilateral cooperation on shared challenges and
opportunities. Each Pacific country has a unique relationship with Australia.
The Government will continue to engage Pacific partners on ways to build on our deep
cultural and people-to-people links with the Pacific family. This includes a new permanent
migration pathway through the PEV and enhancements to the PALM scheme. These
initiatives will deepen Australia’s integration with the Pacific and our contribution to its
long-term development and economic sustainability.
The Government has also agreed to a request from Tuvalu to elevate our bilateral
relationship to a more advanced, integrated and comprehensive partnership, to be known
as the Falepili Union. Falepili is a Tuvaluan word for the traditional values of good
neighbourliness, care and mutual respect. The Falepili Union is a unique agreement that
reflects modern challenges, responding to Tuvalu’s special circumstances, including the
existential threat to Tuvalu posed by climate change. It comprises a bilateral treaty
between Tuvalu and Australia covering three main areas of cooperation on climate change,
human mobility and security, as well as commitment in a joint leaders’ statement to uplift
our broader bilateral partnership.
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommends the Australian Government considers steps necessary to
expand Australia’s media footprint in the Pacific, including through:
• expanding the provision of Australian public and commercial television and
digital content across the Pacific, noting existing efforts by the PacificAus TV
initiative and Pacific Australia;
• reinvigorating Radio Australia, which is well regarded in the region, to boost its
digital appeal; and
• consider governance arrangements for an Australian International Media
Corporation to formulate and oversee the strategic direction of Australia’s
international media presence in the Pacific.
Response:
The Government partially accepts this recommendation.
The Government is supporting Australia’s media and broadcasting presence in the Pacific,
including through the provision of Australian public and commercial television, digital and
radio content across the Pacific.
In the 2023-24 Budget, the Government committed $23 million over four years to continue
delivery of high quality Australian commercial television content to broadcasters in the
Pacific via the PacificAus TV program (managed by the Department of Infrastructure,
Transport, Regional Development, Communications and the Arts).
In the past two budgets, the ABC has also been provided with $40.5 million in additional
funding, including to: expand transmission infrastructure for Radio Australia in the Pacific;
provide bespoke Pacific content for Radio Australia, ABC Australia, and ABC digital; and
build media capacity in the Indo-Pacific. In accordance with its Charter, programming and
editorial decisions for these services are the responsibility of the ABC’s board and
executive.
In addition, since 2008, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade’s Pacific Media
Assistance Scheme has invested $25.9 million to support professionalism and
independence of the Pacific media sector. The long-standing Media for Development
Initiative ($18.8 million 2017-2026) provides media training, infrastructure, and content
development support in Papua New Guinea.
The proposal for an Australian International Media Corporation, to oversee the strategic
direction of Australia’s international media presence in the Pacific, is not accepted, due to
the significant cost, likelihood of duplication with existing international services embedded
within the ABC, and the alternative approach proposed by the Government through its
commitment to an Indo-Pacific Broadcasting Strategy.
Recommendation 7 will be considered further as the Government finalises and implements
the Strategy.
Glossary
AAV Australian Agriculture Visa
ABC Australian Broadcasting Corporation
ABF Australian Border Force
ADF Australian Defence Force
AFP Australian Federal Police
AGD Attorney General’s Department
DFAT Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
DoD Department of Defence
DoE Department of Education
DoH Department of Health
Home Affairs Department of Home Affairs
ILO International Labour Organization
IPPF International Planned Parenthood Federation
PACMAS Pacific Media Assistance Scheme
PALM Pacific Australia Labour Mobility
PEV Pacific Engagement Visa
PJSP Pacific Justice Sector Programme
PMC Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet
PMSP Pacific Maritime Security Program
PPDP-R Pacific Police Development Program - Regional
VET Vocational Education and Training
