Australian Government response to the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security Report:
National Security Legislation Amendment (Comprehensive
Review and Other Measures No. 3) Bill 2023
MAY 2024
Australian Government Response to the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security Report
Advisory Report on the National Security Legislation Amendment (Comprehensive Review
and Other Measures No. 3) Bill 2023
The Government thanks the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security
(‘Committee’) for its Advisory Report on the National Security Legislation Amendment
(Comprehensive Review and Other Measures No. 3) Bill 2023.
The Government provides the following responses to the Committee’s recommendations
Recommendations
Recommendation 1: The Committee recommends that, following the entry into effect of
the new notification provisions in Part 3 of Schedule 1 and Part 2 of Schedule 4 of the
National Security Legislation Amendment (Comprehensive Review and Other Measures
No. 3) Bill 2023, ASIO include in its Annual Report all instances where it has notified
the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security about delayed security assessments,
delayed security clearance decisions or delayed security clearance suitability
assessments.
Response:
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government notes that reporting will remain consistent with ASIO’s approach to
releasing information about its activities through their annual report. This approach balances
the need for transparency against the risk of compromising national security through the
inclusion of classified appendices, which are provided to the Minister for Home Affairs, the
Leader of the Opposition, the Committee, the Inspector-General of Intelligence and Security
the and the Independent National Security Legislation Monitor (INSLM).
Recommendation 2: The Committee recommends that the Government review all
forms, guidance materials and other relevant documentation and advice made available
to individuals about security assessment and security clearance processes, to ensure that
all applicants are made aware of their right to make a complaint to the Inspector-
General of Intelligence and Security in relation to same.
Response:
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
Recommendation 3: The Committee recommends that, in respect of the inclusion of the
Australian Signals Directorate (ASD) in the proposed new cover employment provisions
in the Intelligence Services Act 2001 in Part 1 of Schedule 2 of the National Security
Legislation Amendment (Comprehensive Review and Other Measures No. 3) Bill 2023:
• the Explanatory Memorandum be amended to include information as to ASD’s
inclusion and remove reference to Recommendation 70 of the Comprehensive
Review; and
• ASD report to the Committee, as part of the Committee’s 2023-24 annual review
of ASD’s administration and expenditure, on its development, implementation
and use of cover arrangements, including justification for their use by staff or
particular subsets of staff, and safeguards to ensure that use of cover is necessary
and proportionate.
Response:
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
Recommendation 4: The Committee recommends that the Government consider
aligning the proposed amendments to the Intelligence Services Act 2001 and the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979 secrecy offences contained in
Parts 2 and 4 of Schedule 2 with recommendations that may be relevant from the
Independent National Security Legislation Monitor’s review into secrecy offence
legislation, pending the timing of completion of that review and passage of this
legislation.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government will consider any recommendations made by the INSLM’s review of the
secrecy offences in Part 5.6 of the Criminal Code when that review is completed.
Recommendation 5: The Committee recommends that, following implementation of the
recommendations in this report, the National Security Legislation Amendment
(Comprehensive Review and Other Measures No. 3) Bill 2023 be passed by the
Parliament.
Response:
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
