Australian Government response to the
Rural and Regional Affairs and Transport Legislation
Committee report:
Inspector-General of Live Animal Exports Amendment
(Animal Welfare) Bill 2023
March 2024
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the opportunity to respond to the Rural and Regional
Affairs and Transport Legislation Committee report: Inspector-General of Live Animal
Exports Amendment (Animal Welfare) Bill 2023, tabled on 30 August 2023.
Animal welfare is important to the Australian community, which expects robust oversight,
accountability and transparency of animal welfare in livestock exports. The Inspector-
General of Live Animal Exports Amendment (Animal Welfare) Bill 2023 reinforces the
government's commitment to strengthening animal welfare by expanding the current office of
the Inspector-General of Live Animal Exports to provide enhanced focus on animal welfare.
This Bill, together with the funding that we have already committed through the October
2022-23 Budget to expand this office, delivers on our 2022 election commitment. The
additional objects and functions proposed in this Bill will help to increase oversight,
accountability and transparency for animal welfare in exported livestock, and delivers on the
government’s commitment to strengthening animal welfare.
The Australian Government’s response to the report is set out below. The response
addresses the recommendation of the Committee and the additional comments provided by
the Australian Greens Senators.
Response
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the Senate pass the bill.
Response
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
Australian Greens Senators additional comments
Recommendation 1
The bill should be amended to provide that the Inspector-General has oversight of all
Commonwealth Government regulation of animal welfare.
Response
The Australian Government does not support this recommendation.
The Bill already provides for the oversight of animal welfare regulation by the
Commonwealth where it has clear responsibilities regarding the export of live animals.
Expanding its scope risks duplicating existing requirements detailed in various other
legislation and policies at the state, territory and Commonwealth level with the attendant
risks of obsolescence, inconsistency or unintended legislative consequences.
It is noted that the Australian Greens additional comments reference the domestic harvesting
of kangaroos for commercial purposes, which is a clear state and territory responsibility. The
government has been careful to ensure that this Bill clearly relates to Commonwealth
statutory responsibilities and functions under the Export Control Act 2020.
Recommendation 2
The bill should be amended to recognise animal sentience in law.
Response
The Australian Government does not support this recommendation.
Promoting or recognising animal sentience within Commonwealth law and practice is not
appropriate for this Bill or a suitable role for an Inspector-General. The core role of the
Inspector-General will be to monitor, investigate and report on the development of animal
welfare standards and the implementation of live animal export legislation. The role is one of
assuring the Commonwealth’s livestock exports systems.
Recommendation 3
The bill should be amended to require that the Inspector-General have expertise in animal
welfare science, animal welfare law, or animal welfare policy.
Response
The Australian Government does not support this recommendation.
The role of the Inspector-General is to oversee the regulator. The key responsibility of the
Inspector-General is to monitor, investigate and report on the development of animal welfare
standards and the implementation of live animal export legislation.
In doing so, the Inspector-General plays a critical function in promoting continual
improvements in the regulatory practice, performance and culture of the Department of
Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry in its role as the regulator of animal welfare and export
legislation and standards in relation to the export of livestock.
This is entirely consistent with how other Inspector-General legislation operates.
It is not considered appropriate for primary legislation to place prescriptive constraints on the
qualification of the Inspector-General, because it may unnecessarily hinder the selection
process for the most suitable candidate.
A full selection process will be undertaken to appoint the new Inspector-General. This
process is intended to find a person who has suitable qualifications, experience and
expertise in both animal welfare and live animal export regulation. Public consultation
indicated that post-graduate veterinary or animal welfare science qualifications, in addition to
relevant industry experience and professional memberships, are desirable.
If, however, the Inspector-General judged it necessary or appropriate, specialist expertise
may be engaged to provide any additional expertise required.
The Bill explicitly provides that the Inspector-General may consult relevant experts to assist
in the performance of the Inspector-General’s duties. This ensures that the Inspector-
General has the means to seek expertise where it is judged necessary.
Recommendation 4
The bill should be amended to require the Inspector-General to disclose any conflicts of
interest that conflict or could conflict with the proper performance of their functions.
Response
The Australian Government does not support this recommendation.
Under the arrangements already in place in legislation, officials of a Commonwealth entity –
who have a material personal interest in the affairs of an entity – must positively disclose
details of the interest.
This applies to the occupant of the Inspector-General role.
In addition, section 22 of the Inspector-General of Live Animal Exports Act 2019, provides
the Minister with the ability to terminate the Inspector-General if they do not comply with the
accountability requirements of the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability
Act 2013.
Recommendation 5
A national Independent Office of Animal Welfare should be established to develop,
implement and oversee Commonwealth regulation of animal welfare in Australia.
Response
The Australian Government does not support this recommendation.
The establishment of an Independent Office of Animal Welfare is not a matter relevant to this
Bill or a suitable role for an Inspector-General.
