Australian Government response to the
Senate Rural and Regional Affairs and Transport
Legislation Committee report:
Primary Industries (Excise) Levies Bill 2023
[Provisions] and related bills
MAY 2024
Introduction
The agricultural levy system provides for the imposition and collection of excise levies and
customs charges to enable collective investment in strategic priorities, including research and
development (R&D), marketing, biosecurity activities, biosecurity responses, and residue
testing. The system in its current form has been in place since 1989.
Over time, the agricultural levies legislative framework has become overly complex, duplicative,
and inconsistent. The levy system is currently underpinned by over 50 pieces of legislation.
There are currently more than 110 levies and charges imposed on more than 75 commodities
across the agriculture, fisheries, and forestry sectors.
The sunsetting of multiple levies legislative instruments triggered a thematic review of the
legislative framework by the then Department of Agriculture and Water Resources (the
Department) in 2017-18. The review found that the legislative framework is necessary for a
successful industry-government arrangement, but the current legislation is ineffective in
meeting industries’ needs now and in the future. Key legislative instruments are due to sunset
on 1 April 2025.
The modernising agricultural levies Bills package includes the:
• Primary Industries (Excise) Levies Bill 2023 (Excise Bill)
• Primary Industries (Customs) Charges Bill 2023 (Customs Bill)
• Primary Industries (Services) Levies Bill 2023 (Services Bill)
• Primary Industries Levies and Charges Collection Bill 2023 (Collection Bill)
• Primary Industries Levies and Charges Disbursement Bill 2023 (Disbursement Bill)
• Primary Industries (Consequential Amendments and Transitional Provisions) Bill 2023
(C&T Bill).
If passed by Parliament, this package of Bills would replace the existing agricultural levies
legislative framework to provide contemporary, flexible and efficient legislation that better
supports Australia’s agricultural levy system.
The Government thanks the Senate Rural and Regional Affairs and Transport Legislation
Committee for its inquiry into these bills, and thanks those organisations and individuals who
made submissions to the inquiry.
The Committee tabled its report on 5 February 2024, making one recommendation.
The Coalition Senators’ Dissenting Report makes four recommendations.
The Government’s response to the recommendations made in the Committee’s Final Report,
including the Dissenting Report, is provided below.
Committee Final Report
Response
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Senate passes the bills.
Response
The Government supports this recommendation.
Coalition Dissenting Report
Response
Recommendation 1
That the Minister tables addenda to the explanatory memoranda for the Primary Industries
Levies and Charges Collection Bill 2023 and the Primary Industries Levies and Charges
Disbursement Bill 2023 as a matter of urgency.
Response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government has prepared addenda to the Explanatory Memoranda for the Collection and
Disbursement Bills as recommended by the Senate Standing Committee for the Scrutiny of
Bills. The Government intends to table the addenda as soon as practicable.
Recommendation 2
That the Australian Government undertakes a further consultation process on the
subordinate legislation with key stakeholders, including Plant Health Australia, Animal
Health Australia, Research and Development Corporations (RDCs) and associated peak
industry organisations.
Response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The draft Bills have been informed by consultation over several years with industry groups, levy
and charge payers, collection agents, and levy recipient bodies.
The draft Excise, Customs, Services, Collection and Disbursement Bills were made available
for public consultation from 1 May 2023 to 5 June 2023. A selection of the draft regulations and
rules that would sit under the draft Bills were also made available and stakeholders were
advised that the full suite of draft regulations and rules would be released for consultation in
early 2024.
Public consultation on exposure draft regulations proposed to be made under a Primary
Industries (Excise) Levies Act and Primary Industries (Customs) Charges Act, and rules to be
made under a Primary Industries Levies and Charges Collection Act and Primary Industries
Levies and Charges Disbursement Act respectively (if the Bills before Parliament are enacted)
opened on 27 February 2024 for eight weeks. Stakeholders, including RDCs, Animal Health
Australia, Plant Health Australia and industry representative bodies, were invited to submit their
feedback.
Recommendation 3
That the Australian Government properly consult on biosecurity funding mechanisms, with
consideration of:
• a full cost recovery basis for managing biosecurity risks of both passengers and
produce entering Australia to ensure biosecurity standards are maintained; and
• an import container levy to increase a shared responsibility and accountability by risk
creators.
Response
The Government notes this recommendation.
This recommendation is not directly relevant to the Primary Industries (Excise) Levies Bill 2023
[Provisions] and related bills, which is the subject of this Report. Nevertheless, a detailed
response has been provided for completeness.
A strong and sustainably funded biosecurity system is critical to protecting Australia’s economy,
environment and way of life.
Biosecurity is a shared responsibility, including contributing to the cost of safeguarding
Australia from potentially devastating pest and disease outbreaks.
The Government is delivering on its 2023-24 Budget commitment to implement a sustainable
biosecurity funding model that shares costs between industry, the public and government to
protect Australia’s unique environment and agriculture. The main elements of that package –
ongoing general taxpayer funding and ensuring importers pay their fair share – are in place.
As part of the sustainable funding model, both general taxpayer and risk creator contributions
have increased from 1 July 2023.
Through separate legislation, the Government is now implementing the remaining measures
from the 2023-24 Budget package, particularly the Biosecurity Protection Levy and the new
cost recovery charge for the clearance of low value imports, both of which are intended to
commence on 1 July 2024.
The Government will make every effort to ensure that our biosecurity cost recovery
arrangements remain fit for purpose and aligned to the actual costs of managing biosecurity
risk associated with imports.
Recommendation 4
That the Senate supports amendments to the Imposition Bills to:
• formally acknowledge Animal Health Australia and Plant Health Australia levy instead
of a ‘biosecurity activity’ levy; and
• formally acknowledge the Emergency Animal Disease Response or Emergency Plant
Pest Response Levies instead of ‘biosecurity response’ levy.
Response
The Government does not agree with this recommendation.
The Government is committed to ensuring that Animal Health Australia (AHA) and Plant Health
Australia (PHA) can continue supporting Australia’s agricultural, fisheries and forestry
industries’ biosecurity preparedness and response capabilities.
The Bills support the continuation of AHA and PHA’s important role in enhancing Australia’s
animal and plant health status, while also being flexible enough to allow for future industry
changes and innovation. The renaming of these levies is consistent with the naming
conventions used for other primary industries levies, such as R&D levies, where the levy is
named for the activities it primarily funds, rather than for the individual levy recipient body to
which the levy is paid.
AHA and PHA are both named in the Disbursement Bill as bodies to which biosecurity activity
and biosecurity response levies must be paid. The renaming of AHA, PHA, Emergency Animal
Disease Response and Emergency Plant Pest Response levies would not change the bodies to
which these levies are disbursed nor the activities these levies currently fund.
Rules proposed to be made under the Disbursement Bill would list each biosecurity activity or
biosecurity response levy or charge that would have to be paid to AHA and PHA. Draft
Disbursement Rules that include these lists were released for public consultation in
February 2024.
