Australian Government response to the Senate
Finance and Public Administration References
Committee report:
APS Inc: undermining public sector capability and
performance
MAY 2024
Government Response to the Senate Finance and Public Administration References
Committee report:
APS Inc: undermining public sector capability and performance
Government response to recommendations 1 to 36
The Government thanks the Senate Finance and Public Administration Committee for the
report ‘APS Inc: undermining public sector capability and performance’ and notes the
recommendations in the report. However, given the passage of time since this report was
tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate as many
recommendations have already been addressed in the Government’s APS Reform agenda and
2023-24 Budget measures. The APS Reform agenda builds on a range of reform efforts,
reviews and sources to date and positions the APS to be future fit and capable of adapting and
evolving to changing and rising expectations.
Number Recommendation
1 The committee recommends that the Australian Government abolish the
Average Staffing Level cap and require agencies and departments to manage
staffing levels within the funding envelope provided by the Budget.
2 The committee recommends that the principal mode of employment in the
Australian Public Service (APS) be direct, permanent employment. Short term
peaks in employment requirements should in the first instance be filled with
either the redeployment of permanent staff or the direct employment of APS
non-ongoing staff. The use of labour hire should only occur where it is not
possible to engage non-ongoing staff directly.
3 The committee recommends that the Australian Government:
• identify where Australian Public Service (APS) work has been
contracted out to labour hire companies; and
• develop and report on a strategy to return the work to direct APS
employment.
4 The committee recommends that the Australian Public Service Commission
examine the Jobs and Skills Exchange initiative in the Victorian Public Service,
with a view to establishing a similar initiative in the Australian Public Service.
5 The committee recommends that the annual employee census conducted by the
Australian Public Service Commission ahead of the State of the Service report
be expanded to include all labour hire staff who have been engaged on behalf of
the Australian Public Service in that calendar year.
The resulting data should be reported in an aggregated and disaggregated
format. In addition, labour hire level data should be collated and used to
evaluate the performance of individual firms.
6 The committee recommends that the Australian Public Service Commission
collect and publish standardised agency and service-wide data on the Australian
Government’s utilisation of contractors, consultants, and labour hire workers.
2
Number Recommendation
7 The committee recommends that the Australian Government require all
agencies to disclose:
• the contractual arrangements (including pay rates and conditions) of all
labour hire workers in their agency; and
• the margins charged by each labour hire company they engage.
8 The committee recommends that the Department of Finance regularly collect
and annually publish service-wide expenditure data on contractors, consultants,
and labour hire workers, including the cost differential between direct
employment and external employment for each role.
9 The committee recommends that the Australian Government require all
agencies to publicly disclose the rates and conditions of Australian Public
Service employees, and that this information is drawn to the attention of labour
hire staff.
10 The committee recommends that the Australian Government guarantee that no
worker employed on a labour hire, contract or consultancy basis should receive
less in their take home pay or overall employment package than an Australian
Public Service employee performing comparable work.
11 The committee recommends that the Australian Government require that there
is a limit placed on the number of consecutive fixed-term labour hire contracts
an agency can issue for a role, with an overall cap of 12 months. Once this cap
has been exceeded, the role must be filled through direct employment in the
Australian Public Service, either on an ongoing or non-ongoing basis.
12 The committee recommends that the Australian Government require agencies to
undertake a cost-comparison analysis prior to any engagement of external staff,
factoring in both the financial cost and longer-term impacts on agency capacity
and capability.
13 The committee recommends that the Australian Public Service Commission
seek advice about whether a conflict of interest arises, or whether it is in the
interest of effective procurement consistent with the Commonwealth
Procurement Rules, to have the following arrangements:
• labour hire employees engaged by agencies that have regulatory
oversight over entities that themselves have labour hire arrangements
potentially with the same labour hire provider; and
• multiple 'shopfront' agencies owned by the same parent company
competing for Commonwealth tenders or being on the same
Commonwealth panel.
14 The committee recommends that the Australian Government immediately
finalise and publish the Digital Review conducted by the Digital
Transformation Agency.
In line with recommendation 14 of the Independent Review of the APS, the
committee recommends the Digital Review include information relating to:
• current and forecast ICT expenditure and assets;
3
Number Recommendation
• systems scheduled for retirement or no longer supported by software
vendors (and the associated risks);
• future requirements; and
• any urgent ICT capital investment needs.
15 The committee recommends that the Australian Government, as a matter of
priority, use the findings of the Digital Review to develop and fund a long-term,
whole-of-government ICT blueprint, as recommended in the Independent
Review of the Australian Public Service.
16 The committee recommends that where ICT contracts must be awarded to
multinational corporations, at a minimum the Australian Government must
require those corporations to produce a copy of reporting under the Global
Reporting Initiative Tax Standard, or implement the standard within one year.
17 The committee recommends that the Australian Government apply greater
scrutiny in the awarding of ICT contracts to ensure that:
• Australian companies are given the chance to compete on a level playing
field.
• External providers are only used when absolutely necessary to ensure
that technical capacity is built within the APS.
18 The committee recommends that the Australian Government commit to
developing robust engagement guidelines (similar to those used by the
Victorian Government) to ensure that as a first principle, external professional
services should not be engaged to undertake work identified as a universal and
enduring public service function.
19 The committee recommends that the Australian Government require that
contracts of engagement for external consultants include a mandatory,
enforceable provision requiring skill transfer back to Australian Public Service
employees.
20 The committee recommends that the Australian Government establish a
consultancy hub to provide in-house consultancy services to Australian Public
Service departments and agencies.
The consultancy hub should draw lessons from the establishment of the
Government Consulting Hub operating within the United Kingdom Civil
Service.
The consulting hub should be responsible for monitoring and developing
agency-level policy capability.
The consulting hub should be responsible for assessing and approving all
requests from agencies to use external consultants, and be given the authority to
rewrite specifications before contracts are put out for tender.
21 The committee recommends that the Australian Government consider
introducing an effective cap on the amount agencies can spend on external
consultants.
22 The committee recommends that the Department of Finance lead work to
reform how consultancies are categorised and tagged in AusTender with the
4
Number Recommendation
goal of more accurately capturing the level of expenditure on consultants across
the Australian Public Service.
The committee recommends that the Department of Finance take into account
the previous findings of the Australian National Audit Office in designing the
AusTender reform.
23 The committee recommends that the Department of Finance develop a
comprehensive strategy to improve procurement and contract management
capability across the Australian Public Service, with a particular focus on the
areas of concern identified by the Australian National Audit Office.
24 The committee recommends that the Australian Government revise the Public
Sector Workplace Relations Policy 2020 to remove the cap on public sector
wage increases tied to the Wage Price Index.
25 The committee recommends that the Australian Government revise the Public
Sector Workplace Relations Policy 2020 to enable agencies to genuinely
bargain, in good faith, without restrictions on enhancing employment
conditions.
26 The committee recommends that the Australian Government revise the Public
Sector Workplace Relations Policy 2020 to build a more collaborative
workplace culture, including by improving consultation rights for staff through
their union.
27 The committee recommends that the Australian Government implement
recommendation 33 of the Independent Review of the Australian Public Service
and move towards common core conditions and pay scales for APS- level and
Executive Level employees.
28 The committee recommends that the Secretaries Board and the Australian
Public Service Commissioner publish the final report of the Australian Public
Service Hierarchy and Classification Review upon receipt and act upon its
recommendations as soon as practicable.
29 The committee recommends that the Australian Public Service Commission
commit to regular, published evaluation updates on the operations of the
Australian Public Service Surge Reserve.
30 The committee recommends that the Australian Public Service Commission
regularly monitor, collate and publish mobility metrics for agencies.
31 The committee recommends that the Australian Public Service Commission
monitor and evaluate the operation of the Australian Public Service Academy
and provide public, yearly updates on what the initiative has achieved in
tangible terms.
32 The committee recommends that the Australian Public Service Commission
monitor and evaluate the operation of the Australian Government Graduate
Program in order to refine it as necessary so that graduate recruitment
5
Number Recommendation
consistently contributes to addressing critical skill gaps in the Australian Public
Service workforce.
33 The committee recommends that the Australian Government place greater
importance on the role of the Australian Government Graduate Program and
consider expanding it to a more ambitious scale, particularly as the Australian
Public Service and the Australian economy more broadly recover from the
impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
34 In light of the current gender wage gap of 6.6 per cent, the committee
recommends that the Australian Public Service Commission undertake analysis
of why a gender wage gap in the Australian Public Service persists and
implement a plan to eliminate it.
35 The committee recommends that the Australian Public Service Commission
conduct research to establish whether the long-term shift away from a common
set of pay and conditions across agencies has impacted on the gender wage gap
within the Australian Public Service.
36 The committee recommends that the Australian Government amend the Public
Service Act 1999 as per recommendation 5 of the Independent Review of the
Australian Public Service (APS) to:
reflect key principles for the APS — apolitical, stewardship, openness, integrity
and adherence to merit, and
extend application of these principles and APS Values to Commonwealth
agencies not covered by the Public Service Act 1999.
6
