Australian Government response to the
House of Representatives Standing Committee on
Procedure report:
Role of the Federation Chamber: Celebrating 20 years of
operation
May 2024
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Liaison Committee of Committee Chairs and Deputy
Chairs consider the mechanisms available to committees to seek to have their reports
presented and/or debated in the Federation Chamber.
Australian Government Response
When the Committee report was tabled in June 2015, standing order 215 only provided for
the presentation of committee reports in the House and not in the Federation Chamber.
This standing order was amended on 31 August 2016 to allow committee reports to be
presented in the Federation Chamber and now reads:
“(a) A member of the committee must present the report of the committee together
with the minutes of proceedings, to the House or Federation Chamber.”
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that Standing Orders 1 and 192B be amended to allow for a
grievance debate of up to two hours on Mondays if there is no government business before
the Federation Chamber.
Australian Government Response
The Government notes the recommendation from the Committee. The Government has
made changes to the Standing Orders on 27 July 2022, 5 September 2022, 8 September
2022 and 30 March 2023.
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that Standing Orders 1 and 193 be amended to allow for up to
60 minutes of three minute constituency statements on Monday, Wednesday and Thursday
meetings of the Federation Chamber.
Australian Government Response
The Government notes the recommendation from the Committee. The Government has
made changes to the Standing Orders on 27 July 2022, 5 September 2022, 8 September
2022 and 30 March 2023.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that Standing Order 192, Figure 4 be amended to clarify the
indicative nature of the order of business for the Federation Chamber.
Australian Government Response
The title of both Standing Order 192 and Figure 4 was amended on 1 September 2016 from
‘Federation Chamber’s order of business’ to ‘Federation Chamber’s indicative order of
business’.
1
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends that the Federation Chamber be further enhanced to:
• provide a room fitout that distinguishes it from committee rooms and marks the status
of the venue; and
• ensure that speech timing clocks are the same as those in the Chamber.
Australian Government Response
The Government notes the recommendation.
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends that additional resources be provided to the government and
opposition Federation Chamber Whips through the provision of additional staffing to
support these duties.
Australian Government Response
The Government notes the recommendation. However, given the passage of time since this
report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommends that the role and work of the Federation Chamber be
promoted on the House of Representatives section of the Parliament of Australia website
and in the information given to visitors to Parliament House.
Australian Government Response
The Government notes the recommendation. The Federation Chamber is promoted under
the Infosheets in the House of Representatives section of the Parliament of Australia
website.
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends that glass panels be fitted to all doors that are normally closed
during meetings of the Federation Chamber to allow proceedings to be observed from
outside.
Australian Government Response
The Government notes the recommendation.
2
