Australian Government response to the
House of Representatives Standing Committee on
Employment, Education and Training report:
Australian Government Arrangements for non-NHMRC
Funding for Research
May 2024
Overview
The House of Representatives Standing Committee on Employment, Education and Training
has made 15 recommendations in their report Australian Government Arrangements for
non-NHMRC Funding for Research. This report responds to the inquiry into the efficiency,
effectiveness, and coherency of Australian Government funding for research, referred by
the former Minister for Education and Training, Senator the Hon Simon Birmingham on 19
May 2018.
The Australian Government notes that a large amount of work in relation to many of the
recommendations is already underway. Other recommendations are under active
consideration and development. This work, along with the recently completed Australian
Universities Accord process which examined many of the matters covered in this inquiry,
reflects the Australian Government’s ongoing consultation with the higher education
research sector and the importance it places on this part of the higher education system.
Over the four years from 2023-24 to 2026-27, a total of around $16.0 billion will be provided
through the Education portfolio to support Australia’s research capacity and higher
education research sector, including funding for research block grants, national research
infrastructure, university research commercialisation measures, and the Australian Research
Council’s (ARC) National Competitive Grants Program (NCGP).
Australia’s research sector is strong, diverse, and known for its capacity to produce world-
standard research. Our excellent researchers help to build the reputations of our higher
education institutions, which in turn attracts exceptional international researchers and
students to our universities, with flow on effects to the entire economy.
A crucial part of a high-performance research sector is the ability for researchers to
translate their work into productive outcomes for industry and society. Collaboration
between researchers and industry is an important enabler to ensure Government
investment in research translates into tangible societal benefits. Our researchers perform
well but international comparisons of industry collaboration suggest improvements could be
made.
Government Response
The Government notes all recommendations. However, given the passage of time since this
report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.
1
