Australian Government response to the
House of Representatives Standing Committee on
Petitions report:
Your voice can change our future: Inquiry into the future
of petitioning in the House
May 2024
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that standing orders be amended to allow Members of the
House of Representatives (outside of the membership of the Committee) to present
petitions during the allotted petitions time at 10.00 am until 10.10 am on sittings Mondays,
should any time remain following the Chair’s statement.
Australian Government Response
The Government notes the recommendation.
Recommendation 2
To reduce the number of out of order petitions, the Committee recommends that petitions
be considered as ‘addressed to the House’ if they are either addressed to the House of
Representatives, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the Federal Government, the
Parliament, a federal Minister, or a Member of the House of Representatives.
Australian Government Response
The Government notes the recommendation.
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the process of creating a petition be streamlined so that
petitioners complete one online form hosted on the Australian Parliament House website,
to create either an e-petition or paper petition.
Australian Government Response
The Government notes the recommendation. This reform has been made to the APH
website.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that standing order 204 (e) should be updated so that a
petition cannot include any Universal Resource Locators (URLs) or reference to specific
web links.
Australian Government Response
The Government notes the recommendation, and advises amendments were made on
4 July 2019, Standing Order 204(f) refers.
Recommendation 5
The Committee recommends that standing orders be amended to require that a person
creating or signing a petition must either be a resident or citizen of Australia.
1
Australian Government Response
The Government notes the recommendation, and advises amendments were made on
4 July 2019, Standing Orders 205(a) [paper petitions] and 205A(a) [e-petitions] refer.
Recommendation 6
The Committee recommends that Members be encouraged to give notice for debates on
petitions during private Members’ business time.
Australian Government Response
The Government notes the recommendation.
Recommendation 7
The Committee recommends that:
• petitions with at least 20,000 signatures be considered for debate during a dedicated
period for petitions debates in the Federation Chamber;
• The Procedure Committee consider the necessary changes to the standing orders to
enable such debates; and
• Should this measure be implemented, the Petitions Committee review the 20,000
signature threshold during the 46th Parliament.
Australian Government Response
The Government notes the recommendation.
Recommendation 8
The Committee recommends that standing order 209 be amended to recognise any verbal
responses to a petition given during a debate on that petition.
Australian Government Response
The Government notes the recommendation from the Committee. The Government has
made changes to the Standing Orders on 27 July 2022, 5 September 2022, 8 September
2022 and 30 March 2023.
Recommendation 9
The Committee recommends exploring the opportunity for the Department of the House of
Representatives, in collaboration with the Parliamentary Education Office, to develop
educational resources about petitioning in the House, to be targeted at school-aged
children.
Australian Government Response
The Government notes the recommendation.
2
