Australian Government response to the
Joint Committee of Public Accounts and Audit Report 498:
'Commitment issues' - An inquiry into Commonwealth procurement
May 2024
Response to the Committee’s Recommendations
Recommendation 1
2.143 The Committee recommends that the Department of Finance work to advance public
sector procurement capability and professionalisation by:
• prioritising the development and rollout of a procurement professional stream within
the Australian Public Service, to facilitate the creation of procurement and contracting
specialists, and
• expanding the current definition of procurement in the Commonwealth Procurement
Rules, to empower and better reflect modern, professionalised procurement practices,
including more active management of supply markets and supply chains to maximise
value for money.
Finance should report back to the Committee within 12 months on its progress to develop
and deliver these outcomes.
Agreed
The Government has established a Procurement and Contract Management Profession under
the APS Professional Streams in line with the existing Professional Streams (HR, Data and
Digital) for the APS with the Australian Public Service Commission.
The definition of procurement in the CPRs covers the full procurement lifecycle. The
lifecycle starts at identifying the need and making a decision on the procurement requirement
(paragraph 2.7 of the CPRs). Market evaluation is a fundamental consideration for many
procurements, and is already captured by the definition of procurement within the CPRs.
Finance will expand the definition of procurement at the next update of the CPRs in line with
the Committee’s recommendation.
Recommendation 2
2.149 The Committee recommends that the Department of Finance amend the
Commonwealth Procurement Rules to reverse the onus such that they apply to corporate
Commonwealth entities by default, with any exceptions to be made by the Finance Minister
via legislative instrument.
Agreed
Finance will determine the appropriate legislative approach to apply the CPRs to corporate
Commonwealth Entities (CCE) by default.
The Government recognises that there may be limited specific circumstances that would justify
an exemption from the CPRs. Finance will develop the requirements and process for seeking
exemptions.
Recommendation 3
2.153 The Committee recommends that the Department of Finance amend paragraph 2.6 of
the Commonwealth Procurement Rules to emphasise that the core principles of achieving
value for money and conducting procurements in a fair, transparent, and accountable
manner continue to apply to the procurement even when an exemption to the rules was
obtained under the paragraph. Finance should develop and issue guidance on paragraph 2.6
to reflect this amendment.
Agreed with qualification
The CPR exclusion mechanism of paragraph 2.6 is intended to recognise that there are genuine
limited circumstances that warrant procurement processes deviating from the CPRs. The
paragraph provides flexibility for an Accountable Authority to apply measures, when
determined to be necessary, that result in all or part of the CPRs not applying to relevant
procurement processes.
Importantly, even when paragraph 2.6 is applied, the requirements of the Public Governance,
Performance and Accountability Act 2013 continue to apply to the procurement, including
promoting the efficient, effective, economical, and ethical use of public resources.
Finance will update the CPRs to emphasise that the PGPA Act continues to apply when
paragraph 2.6 is used. Finance is in the process of strengthening guidance material to support
entities regarding the application of paragraph 2.6.
Recommendation 4
2.160 Noting that reporting on compliance with the Commonwealth Procurement Rules
(CPRs) is currently limited to the inclusion of significant non-compliance in annual reports,
the Committee recommends that the Department of Finance:
• introduce requirements for entities subject to the CPRs to report, at least annually and
certified by the accountable authority, on their compliance with the CPRs
• publish a report annually, commencing in the 2023-24 year, aggregating this
information across the sector to help assess the effectiveness of the procurement
framework, identify areas of risk, and inform changes to the procurement framework
to ensure it remains fit-for-purpose, and
• require Commonwealth entities subject to the CPRs or the Public Governance,
Performance and Accountability Act 2013, by 31 December 2023, to provide Finance
with a report on their internal procurement and delegation policies that outlines how
value for money will be ensured when procuring from panels.
Agreed
Finance will work with entities to introduce compliance reporting and monitoring for
Commonwealth entity procurements through annual reporting requirements and will
introduce the requirements of an annual aggregated reporting mechanism.
