Australian Government response to the
Joint Standing Committee on Treaties report:
Australia-India Economic Cooperation and Trade Agreement
December 2023
Introduction
The Australian Government thanks the Joint Standing Committee on Treaties
(the Committee) for its expedited consideration of the Australia-India Economic Cooperation
and Trade Agreement (ECTA).
The Government provides the following response to the Committee’s recommendations.
1
Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government strongly pursues greater
market access for the Australian wine industry in future Comprehensive Economic
Cooperation Agreement negotiations.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation.
Seeking additional market access for wine is a priority in negotiations for an Australia-
India Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement.
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends the Australian Government implements the
recommendations of Report 193: Strengthening the Trade Agreement and Treaty
Making Process in Australia, particularly in relation to greater consultation and
transparency, and in providing independent modelling and analysis of trade agreements.
Response:
The Government notes this recommendation and proposes to formally respond in the Joint
Standing Committee on Trade and Investment Growth inquiry: Inquiry into the Australian
Government’s approach to negotiating trade and investment agreements.
The Government is improving its consultation and transparency in relation to the free trade
agreement (FTA) negotiations process and endeavours to undertake economic modelling
and/or analysis of trade agreements where appropriate.
The Government requested the Joint Standing Committee on Trade and Investment Growth
inquire into the Government’s approach to negotiating trade and investment agreements.
Identifying methods to strengthen stakeholder consolation and improve transparency was a
key reason for this request.
The Government has also established a Trade 2040 Taskforce, which held its inaugural
meeting on 2 November 2023 and brings together government, industry, unions and
community representatives and serves as a consultative mechanism to further the
Government's trade policy agenda. The Taskforce will help improve the consultative
processes with stakeholders across the forward trade and investment agenda, including
with business, unions and community representatives.
In addition, National Cabinet decided on 30 September 2022 to include a Ministerial
Council on Trade and Investment in the Federal Relations Architecture. It held its second
meeting on 20 October 2023 and is intended to increase coordination on international and
national priorities related to trade and investment across Commonwealth, State and
Territory jurisdictions, including in relation to trade agreements. More information can be
found at: Communique – Second Meeting of the Ministerial Council on Trade and
Investment | Minister for Trade and Tourism (trademinister.gov.au)
2
DFAT sources information on opportunities and potential impacts of FTAs through
extensive consultations and stakeholder engagement. DFAT undertakes appropriate
economic modelling, both commissioned and in house, of individual FTAs on a
case-by-case basis. Independent analysis on new and existing FTAs is also provided by
stakeholders in submissions addressing impacts on the Australian economy as a whole or
on certain sectors. These processes commence before the development of a mandate and
continue throughout the negotiations and after entry into force.
Recommendation 3
The Committee supports the Australia-India Economic Cooperation and Trade
Agreement and recommends that binding treaty action be taken.
Response:
The Government has implemented this recommendation.
The Australia-India Economic Cooperation and Trade Agreement entered into force on
29 December 2022.
3
