Australian Government response to the
Senate Select Committee on Work and Care Reports:
Final Report (9 March 2023)
Interim Report (18 October 2022)
June 2024
Table of Contents
Overview of the Inquiry ......................................................................................................... 3
Overview of the Government Response ................................................................................ 3
1 A Strategic and Integrated Approach ................................................................................. 6
1.1 The Care and Support Economy .................................................................................. 6
1.2 Data and reporting ....................................................................................................... 8
2 Flexible and Supportive Workplaces ................................................................................. 12
2.1 Workplace relations reforms ..................................................................................... 12
2.2 Leave entitlements and forms of work ...................................................................... 15
2.3 Working hours ............................................................................................................ 20
3 Early Childhood Education and Care ................................................................................. 26
3.1 Australia’s ECEC system ............................................................................................. 26
3.2 Subsidised care for children ....................................................................................... 30
4 Targeted Support .............................................................................................................. 34
4.1 Care workforce ........................................................................................................... 34
4.2 Supported employment sector .................................................................................. 40
4.3 Carers ......................................................................................................................... 41
4.4 People preparing for or seeking employment ........................................................... 50
4.5 Workers ...................................................................................................................... 54
2
Overview of the Inquiry
On 3 August 2022, the Senate established the Select Committee on Work and Care
(the Committee) to inquire into and report on the impact that combining work and care
responsibilities has on the wellbeing of workers, carers, and those they care for.
The Committee held hearings across multiple locations across Australia and received a
significant volume of submissions and tabled documents.
On 18 October 2022, the Committee tabled its Interim Report, containing
8 recommendations. On 9 March 2023, the Committee tabled its Final Report. The
Final Report built on the Interim Report by considering a variety of issues within the work
and care system. It put forward 33 recommendations “for structural reform to early
childhood education and care, respite care, support payments and workplace relations
arrangements, including pay, leave, rostering, hours of work, flexibility and job security,
amongst others”.1
The Committee noted that the recommendations “are intended to support workers with
caring responsibilities, and to promote more inclusive, flexible and responsive workplaces, by
creating the conditions that allow people to better combine work and care”.2 Government,
Coalition and Australian Greens senators made additional comments and recommendations.
The Committee’s reports can be found at
www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Work_and_Care.
Overview of the Government Response
The Australian Government would like to thank all those who assisted in the Committee’s
Inquiry. We particularly acknowledge the carers and workers who shared their experiences
and ideas for improving the wellbeing of workers, carers, and those they care for.
Throughout the Inquiry, the Committee received evidence and heard lived experiences
about the challenges of combining work and care responsibilities. The Committee
considered these impacts, as well as the interrelated challenges faced by women, culturally
and linguistically diverse communities, First Nations peoples, people with disability,
veterans, young people, and circumstances that can affect all Australians.
The Government welcomes the findings of the Committee. The Government’s vision is that
all Australians receive high quality, person-centred care and support if they need it,
delivered by workers with quality jobs, and that the systems and services that provide this
care are productive and sustainable. The Government also acknowledges that
fundamentally these issues are about gender equality and recognises the connections with
the gender pay gap and the important contribution of unpaid care work to our community.
1 Select Committee on Work and Care, Final Report, Senate Printing Unit, Parliament House, Canberra
Australia, 2023, p 169.
2 Select Committee on Work and Care, Final Report, pp 169–170.
3
The Government acknowledges the work and care challenges and impacts on certain
cohorts. Women in Australia are more likely than men to work as carers. Women are more
likely to use leave or access flexible work arrangements to provide unpaid care for children
and other family members.
Health care and social assistance is the most common industry of employment for working
age First Nations women. First Nations peoples’ family obligations and kinship networks
compound the extent of caring responsibilities. Government action, developed in
consultation with community, must deliver for First Nations women.
The Committee’s recommendations are a valuable and timely contribution to Australia’s
work and care policy discussion. While the recommendation’s themes are consistent with
Government policy, Government needs to consider implementation, with regard for the
broader budgetary implications and legislative context. As part of this process, the
Government has referred all relevant findings and recommendations to the Fair Work
Commission for consideration as part of the Modern Awards Review 2023–24 requested by
the Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations.
Underpinned by Working for Women: A Strategy for Gender Equality, key activities
underway across government include:
• expanding the Government's Paid Parental Leave scheme
• committing to pay superannuation on government-funded paid parental leave
• implementing significant legislative reforms to the Fair Work Act 2009
• supporting the Fair Work Commission’s Modern Awards Review 2023–24
• delivering the National Carer Strategy
• commissioning the Productivity Commission’s inquiry into the early childhood
education and care (ECEC) sector in Australia
• providing the Carer Inclusive Workplace Initiative, and
• evaluating carer support programs including the Carer Gateway.
The Government response describes these achievements in detail. It also captures other
initiatives, policies and programs that are addressing the Committee’s observations.
• The first chapter addresses the importance of an integrated and strategic approach
to the challenges of work and care, including data and reporting.
• The second chapter addresses the need for flexible and supportive workplaces to
help Australians to balance work and care responsibilities. It covers the
recommendations about leave entitlements, forms of work and working hours.
• The third chapter addresses the specific challenges of ECEC and considers the
recommendations about Australia’s ECEC system.
• The fourth chapter addresses the need to support individuals including carers,
workers, and those seeking employment, including relevant recommendations.
The Committee made 33 recommendations in its Final Report and Australian Greens
Senators made 14 additional recommendations. The Committee also made
8 recommendations in its Interim Report.
4
The Government agrees in full, in part or in principle with 17 recommendations of the Final
Report. The Government agrees with 4 recommendations of the Final Report in full (13, 14,
23 and 31), where actions have been taken or are in the process of being taken. The
Government also agrees in principle with 4 recommendations (9, 10, 11, and 20) as the
broader intent of these recommendations is being acted upon or being considered through
work underway. The Government agrees in part with 9 recommendations (1, 2, 8, 12, 15,
16, 17, 25 and 26) where actions have been taken, or are in the process of being taken, to
address part of the recommendation. The Government notes the remaining
16 recommendations and will further consider the issues as appropriate.
Table of Government Response to Individual Recommendations
Recommendation Response Page Number
1 Agreed in part 7
2 Agreed in part 9
3 Noted 28
4 Noted 29
5 Noted 29
6 Noted 31
7 Noted 32
8 Agreed in part 53
9 Agreed in principle 44
10 Agreed in principle 45
11 Agreed in principle 46
12 Agreed in part 47
13 Agreed 37
14 Agreed 40
15 Agreed in part 38
16 Agreed in part 55
17 Agreed in part 15
18 Noted 16
19 Noted 17
20 Agreed in principle 8
21 Noted 21
22 Noted 22
23 Agreed 23
24 Noted 10
25 Agreed in part 17
26 Agreed in part 18
27 Noted 24
28 Noted 25
29 Noted 32
30 Noted 48
31 Agreed 57
32 Noted 57
33 Noted 11
5
1 A Strategic and Integrated Approach
The Committee investigated the ways in which workers combine working with the care of
family members or friends, such as children, people with disability, medical conditions, or
mental illness, as well as those frail due to age. It noted that care is a collective social
responsibility. It found that a whole of government response is required to meet Australia’s
work and care challenges.
The Committee found that care policies and the underpinning regulatory measures need to
be reviewed and reformed holistically as a whole of government initiative. The Committee
noted that there are multifaceted and interlinked issues for working carers, including the
gendered nature of care, low wages, and insufficient conditions in the sector. The
Committee also commented upon inadequacies within the ECEC system, the parental leave
framework, the availability of flexible working arrangements, and the workplace relations
framework.
The Government is already taking a comprehensive and integrated approach to addressing
the challenges of work and care. Working Future: The Australian Government’s White Paper
on Jobs and Opportunities (Working Future) acknowledges the role of balancing work and
care in supporting inclusion and employment opportunities.
1.1 The Care and Support Economy
In 2022, the Government established the Care and Support Economy Taskforce in the
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet to address key shared challenges across the
aged care, disability support, veterans’ care and ECEC sectors. In the 2024-25 Budget, the
Government established a Care and Support Economy Reform Unit in the Department of the
Prime Minister and Cabinet to succeed the Taskforce. The Unit will focus on improving the
alignment of policies, programs, and actions across aged care, disability support, veterans’
care and ECEC, and tracking the implementation of reforms. Taking this holistic approach to
improving the care and support economy in Australia will deliver quality care and support
with quality jobs, while making sure the care and support economy is productive and
sustainable into the future.
The Government has already acted to address care and support economy challenges,
including:
• implementing Working for Women: A Strategy for Gender Equality
• implemented Cheaper Child Care – making ECEC more affordable for families by
lifting Child Care Subsidy rates from July 2023
• strengthening pay equity through changes to the Fair Work Act 2009
• providing funding to support increases to award wages for many aged care workers
• modernising the Government’s Paid Parental Leave scheme and expanding it by two
additional weeks each year from July 2024 until it reaches 26 weeks from July 2026
• trialling an integrated commissioning approach across primary care, disability
support, aged care, and veterans’ care
6
• supporting Jobs and Skills Australia’s ECEC Capacity Study, and
• getting the National Disability Insurance Scheme for participants, their families, and
carers.
These, along with the measures described throughout this response are addressing the
gender pay gap and the challenges faced by people balancing work and care.
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends the Australian Government take a comprehensive and
integrated approach to addressing the challenges of work and care in this country. The
Australian Government should implement the recommendations in the committee’s interim
and final reports to a range of systems, including workplace relations, early childhood
education and care, paid leave, disability and aged care, as well as financial supports for
carers. This reform package should ensure that Australians have a right to care, alongside
their right to work, and our systems and laws should provide unequivocal support for this
important role through a new work and care social contract fit for the 21st century.
The Government agrees in part to this recommendation.
The Government is taking a comprehensive approach to the issues of work and care across a
range of systems and policy areas. The Government acknowledges the right to care as a
shared responsibility across levels of government. The Government is addressing the issues
at the intersection of work and care:
• First, the Government’s Working for Women: A Strategy for Gender Equality,
launched on 7 March 2024, forms the centrepiece of the Government’s gender
equality policy and identifies unpaid and paid care, and economic equality and
security as priority areas.
• Second, the Government is developing a National Carer Strategy to deliver a
whole-of-government framework to support Australia’s carers.
• Third, the Government’s Employment White Paper, Working Future, sets out its
strategy for the labour market, recognising the role of balancing work and care in
supporting inclusion and employment opportunities.
• Fourth, the Government has created a Care and Support Economy Reform Unit in
the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet to improve the alignment of
policies, programs, and actions across the care and support economy.
• Fifth, the Fair Work Commission is conducting a targeted review of modern awards
following a request made by the Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations
on 12 September 2023. This request followed the Government’s Jobs and Skills
Summit commitment to consider where modern awards can be improved, and to
consult on and research the impact of workplace relations settings on work and care.
7
Recommendation 20
The committee recommends the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet consider
the operation of markets in the aged, disability and early childhood education and care
sectors and the effectiveness of current models of provision (including profit and
not-for-profit models) in delivering quality care and addressing provision in thin markets.
Australian Greens’ Additional Recommendation 13
The Australian Greens recommend the Australian Government urgently review the provision
of for-profit care in the aged, disability, and early childhood education and care sectors,
including:
• consideration of the quantum of public funds diverted from direct service provision to
profit and its consequences for the quality of care;
• comparing the quality of care in for-profit and not-for-profit care; and
• examining the relationship between for-profit provision of care and the occurrence of
‘care deserts’ across Australia.
The Government agrees in principle to this recommendation and notes the Australian
Greens’ additional recommendation.
Relevant Government departments are considering and trialing ways to improve access to
services and service quality, particularly in thin markets.
To better understand these issues, the Government directed the Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission to conduct an inquiry into the market for the supply of ECEC
services. The National Disability Insurance Scheme Review and Aged Care Taskforce also
considered thin market challenges in the National Disability Insurance Scheme and aged
care respectively. The Department of Health and Aged Care Is developing an Aged Care
Market Strategy and undertaken consultations to inform this work.
The Government, through its Integrated Care and Commissioning Project, is trialling
collaborative, place-based and innovative approaches to improve service availability across
health, aged care, disability, and veterans’ care sectors for people living in regional, rural
and remote communities, and for First Nations peoples in targeted urban areas.
The Government notes that these markets should meet First Nations cultural needs,
including services that support people to remain on Country.
1.2 Data and reporting
The Government notes the importance of adequate data to inform policymaking. Data
sources that provide insights into the employment experience of carers and the intersection
between caring and employment already exist and provide a platform to build from.
8
In 2020, Deloitte Access Economics analysis found the estimated cost to replace
informal/unpaid care in Australia was $77.9 billion per year.3 Taking time out of work or
limiting work hours (often for caring responsibilities) can have a big impact on women’s
labour force participation, pay and career progression. In 2022, KPMG analysis found factors
related to unpaid care work interrupted workforce participation and that part-time
employment contributes 33 per cent of the national gender pay gap.4 Published in 2023, the
Government’s White Paper Working Future estimated that the replacement value of unpaid
care work in 2020–21 was around $165.1 billion.
On 7 March 2024, the Government released Working for Women: A Strategy for Gender
Equality which outlines the Government’s vision for gender equality – an Australia where
people are safe, treated with respect, have choices, and have access to resources and equal
outcomes no matter their gender. This is an important mechanism to elevate and prioritise
actions over the next 10 years to drive gender equality in Australia, including addressing
challenges relating to unpaid and paid work and care. This Strategy’s reporting framework
includes outcomes and indicators that will be used to measure change over its lifespan.
To support better information, in 2023 the Government made significant legislative reforms
to the Workplace Gender Equality Agency’s reporting framework through the
Workplace Gender Equality Amendment (Closing the Gender Pay Gap) Act 2023. The
Government also remade subordinate instruments, the Workplace Gender Equality (Gender
Equality Standards) Instrument 2023 and the Workplace Gender Equality (Matters in relation
to Gender Equality Indicators) Instrument 2023. Following these changes, on
27 February 2024, the Workplace Gender Equality Agency published employer-level gender
pay gaps for employers with 100 or more employees. Publishing employer gender pay gaps
is a critical part of legislative action aimed at closing the gender pay gap.
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends the Australian Government include a statement in the
employment white paper, providing an estimate of the annual financial contribution of
unpaid care to the national economy. Further, the committee recommends that the
Australian Government consider including a statement in the Budget papers providing an
estimate of the annual financial contribution of unpaid care to the national economy. The
committee also recommends that the wellbeing budget include specific analysis of the
contribution of care to wellbeing, and include measurement of such care, its state and
change over time.
The Government agrees in part to this recommendation.
In its White Paper, Working Future, the Government provided an estimate of the annual
financial contribution of unpaid care to the national economy.
3 Deloitte Access Economics, The value of informal care in 2020, Carers Australia, 2020.
4 KPMG (2022) She’s Price(d)less: The economics of the gender pay gap, A report for Diversity Council Australia
and WGEA, Australia, p 38.
9
While the Australian Bureau of Statistics has previously published estimates of the value of
unpaid care, the Government appreciates that a more regular and timely measure is an
important step to properly valuing the economic contribution of care work. As such, the
Government has provided funding to the Australian Bureau of Statistics to produce regular
statistics on the amount and value of unpaid care in Australia.
Recommendation 24
The committee recommends the mandatory annual reporting of companies with over
20 000 employees in Australia to the Fair Work Commission on workplace practices to
ensure roster justice and flexible working arrangements.
The committee further recommends the mandatory collection of data by these companies
of requests, including at store level, for roster changes and flexible working arrangements,
and the percentage of changes to shifts that have been initiated by the employer within one
week of the shift taking place. The data should:
• include a collection of all requests, including those deemed 'informal', and detail
whether these requests were approved, approved with modification, or denied;
• provide information on the length of employment (up until the date of reporting) for
that employee after their request was initially made; and
• be provided in full to the Workplace Gender Equality Agency and published on the
respective company's website.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Workplace Gender Equality Agency already requires employers with 100 or more
employees to report on matters including the availability and utility of employment terms,
conditions and practices relating to flexible working arrangements for employees and to
working arrangements supporting employees with family or caring responsibilities.
The reforms made by the Workplace Gender Equality Amendment (Closing the Gender Pay
Gap) Act 2023 have strengthened reporting obligations in respect of this indicator and other
gender equality indicators by requiring employers with 500 or more employees to put in
place policies or strategies against all gender equality indicators. Such employers are now
required to have policies or strategies to support flexible working arrangements and
arrangements to support employees with family or caring responsibilities.
Rostering and flexible working arrangements are being considered by the Fair Work
Commission as part of the Modern Awards Review requested by the Minister for
Employment and Workplace Relations. Discussion papers for both the work and care and
job security streams of the Modern Awards Review 2023–24 identified recommendation 24
as a recommendation for consideration. The Government will consider the outcomes of the
Modern Awards Review once the Fair Work Commission’s Final Report is published.
10
Recommendation 33
The committee recommends the establishment of a new longitudinal data set in parallel to
the Household Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia survey with a specific focus on
workplaces and the experience of workers within them, including how they intersect with
care activities.
The committee further recommends that additional research be funded to independently
analyse and publicly report on the circumstances and experiences of carers in Australia.
Interim Report Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that, as a matter of priority, the Australian Government include
new questions in the Census and/or new regular surveys of a representative group of
workers to determine the extent, nature and effects of the interaction of work and care
responsibilities across Australia. This data collection project should survey workers every five
years with the aim of:
• analysing the extent and nature of the interaction of work and care responsibilities
across Australia, with consideration of particular subgroups including (but not limited
to):
o age;
o gender;
o type of care;
o extent of workforce participation; and
• generating data to allow extensive analysis of the work and care system, and how it
affects outcomes for working carers.
The Government notes this recommendation and the Interim Report recommendation.
The cost and complexity of longitudinal data collection with a workplace level focus would
be more challenging than a longitudinal study of households and people like the Household
Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia study. This is one reason why there is not a
nationally representative, longitudinal workplace level collection, similar to the Australian
Workplace Industrial Relations Survey from the mid-90s, in Australia.
The Government notes that work could be commissioned to assess the extent to which
existing data sources could be better leveraged or enhanced to meet key data requirements
identified by the Committee (for example, integrating additional employer and employee
data into other data collection activities). The Government will consider the most
appropriate approach and avenue for progressing this work.
A Household, Income and Labour Dynamics Australia Women’s Progress Report 2001–2022
has been commissioned to showcase developments in women’s progress since the study
first commenced in 2001. Due in late 2024, the Report is expected to analyse changes in
women’s health and wellbeing, attitudes to gender roles in home and family life and
employment, labour market participation, income and career progression, housing and
homelessness, caring and unpaid labour and how this is shared in households, and financial
health and security.
11
2 Flexible and Supportive Workplaces
The Committee considered the experiences of both paid and unpaid carers and proposed
the need for a new ‘work and care social contract’. This work and care social contract would
enable equalised child care responsibilities for both men and women, promote job security,
provide flexible jobs and transitions in and out of work, and ensure that workers remain
above the poverty line when they cannot work and when in retirement.
The Government is committed to improving pay and conditions for all workers, including
those in the care sector and those who have caring responsibilities. The workplace relations
system should support Australians to manage work and care responsibilities. The
Government has introduced significant legislative amendments to the Fair Work Act 2009
(Fair Work Act) to reform the workplace relations system to achieve these objectives.
This chapter sets out the Government’s response to the Committee’s recommendations
associated with leave entitlements, forms of work and working hours. It provides an
overview of legislative reforms to the workplace relations framework since taking office.
2.1 Workplace relations reforms
The Government has implemented a significant program of legislative reforms to improve
Australia’s workplace relations system. Many of these reforms are supporting employees to
manage their work and care responsibilities more effectively, particularly through improved
flexibility and more bargaining options. Employers and employees are being empowered to
establish working relationships that are appropriate for both workplaces and families.
2.1.1 Paid Family and Domestic Violence Leave reforms
The Fair Work Amendment (Paid Family and Domestic Violence Leave) Act 2022 means
victim/survivors do not need to choose between their safety or their pay. All national
system employees, including casuals, are now entitled to 10 days of paid family and
domestic violence leave each year, at their full rate of pay. This will extend to non-national
system employees on 9 September 2024, 3 months after the International Labour
Organization’s Violence and Harassment at Work Convention, 2019 comes into force for
Australia.
2.1.2 Secure Jobs, Better Pay reforms
The Government introduced key reforms to improve job security and wages through the
Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Secure Jobs, Better Pay) Act 2022, which delivered on the
Government’s election commitments and outcomes from the 2022 Jobs and Skills Summit.
The Secure Jobs, Better Pay reforms improve job security and put gender equality at the
centre of the workplace relations system, through amendments that:
• made gender equality and job security objects of the Fair Work Act
• help guide the way the Fair Work Commission considers equal remuneration cases
and gender-based undervaluation in work value cases
12
• require the Fair Work Commission to consider the need to promote secure work and
achieve gender equality in setting the terms of modern awards
• require the Fair Work Commission to consider the need to achieve gender equality in
setting the national minimum wage and award wages
• establish Expert Panels in the Fair Work Commission so it has the knowledge and
expertise to deal with pay equity and care and community sector matters
• strengthen the right to request flexible working arrangements
• reinvigorate the bargaining system, with a focus on opening it up to low-paid,
female-dominated sectors
• prohibit pay secrecy clauses in employment contracts, and
• limit the use of fixed-term contracts.
2.1.3 Protecting Worker Entitlements reforms
The Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Protecting Worker Entitlements) Act 2023 made
further reforms to enhance worker protections, promote gender equality, remove
unnecessary administrative burden, and clarify aspects of the workplace relations system. It
included amendments to the Fair Work Act to:
• clarify the rights of temporary migrant workers to pay and entitlements is not
affected by their migration status
• insert an entitlement to superannuation in the National Employment Standards, and
• provide stronger access to unpaid parental leave and complement recent changes to
the Paid Parental Leave Act 2010.
2.1.4 Closing Loopholes reforms
The Government also made further improvements to the workplace relations system
through the Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes) Act 2023 and the Fair
Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes No. 2) Act 2024. The Closing Loopholes
reforms make amendments to the Fair Work Act to:
• address the misuse of casual employment arrangements and provide a clearer
pathway to permanent work
• ensure labour hire workers are paid at least the same as directly engaged employees
doing the same work
• criminalise wage theft by introducing criminal offences for intentional
underpayment of employees’ wages and certain entitlements
• provide stronger protections against discrimination, adverse action, and harassment
• extend the powers of the Fair Work Commission to inquire into and set minimum
standards for ‘employee-like’ workers, and
• introduce an employee right to disconnect.
2.1.5 Modern Awards Review 2023–24
In addition to legislative reforms, the Government committed at the Jobs and Skills Summit
to consider where improvements can be made to modern awards, and to conduct detailed
consultation and research on the impact of workplace relations settings (such as rostering
arrangements) on work and care. The Government provided $0.8 million in the
13
2023–24 Budget to the Fair Work Commission and the Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations to deliver on these important commitments.
On 12 September 2023, the Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations wrote to the
President of the Fair Work Commission to recommend the Fair Work Commission undertake
a targeted review of modern awards. The letter identified key priorities for such a review,
including:
a consultation and research process considering the impact of workplace relations
settings (such as rostering arrangements) on work and care, including early
education and care […], having regard to relevant findings and recommendations of
the Final Report of the Senate Select Committee on Work and Care.5
The Fair Work Commission commenced the Modern Awards Review 2023–24 (Modern
Awards Review) on 15 September 2023. It includes a work and care stream that is
considering the impact of workplace relations settings on work and care, having regard to
relevant findings and recommendations of the Committee. The job security stream is also
having regard to certain findings of the Committee.
The consultation process for the work and care stream included a discussion paper on work
and care, a literature review produced by the Western Sydney University, a data profile on
workplace flexibilities, a survey of employers, submissions from interested parties, and
hearings with key stakeholders. The discussion paper on work and care identified the
Committee’s Final Report recommendations 15, 17, 18, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25 and 27 (as well
as Interim Report recommendations 4 and 5) as relevant to the stream.6
The Fair Work Commission will publish its findings in a report at the conclusion of the
Modern Awards Review on, or around, 28 June 2024.
2.1.6 Resourcing the Fair Work Commission
Funding for the Modern Awards Review complements the $20.2 million allocated in the
2022–23 October Budget to establish the Expert Panels for pay equity and the Care and
Community Sector in the Fair Work Commission, assisted by a dedicated research unit.
Taken together, the Government has provided the Fair Work Commission with the
resources and expertise it needs to understand and address the low pay and conditions
faced in female dominated workplaces such as many in the care and community sector.
5 The Minister’s letter is accessible on the Fair Work Commission’s website at www.fwc.gov.au/hearings-
decisions/major-cases/modern-awards-review-2023-24.
6 The Fair Work Commission subsequently noted that given the Closing Loopholes reforms require the Fair
Work Commission to vary all modern awards to include right to disconnect terms from 26 August 2024, the
right to disconnect (Final Report recommendation 23 and Interim Report recommendation 4) would be
considered through separate proceedings rather than through the Modern Awards Review.
14
2.2 Leave entitlements and forms of work
Five Committee recommendations relate to leave entitlement access or forms of work.
Minimum leave entitlements for employees are set in law through the National Employment
Standards. An award, registered agreement or contract of employment can provide for
other leave entitlements, but they cannot be less beneficial than the entitlement in the
National Employment Standards. Employers can also provide terms and conditions of
employment above the legislated minimum standard, including greater quantum and access
to paid leave for employees.
Recommendation 17
The committee recommends that the definition of 'immediate family' in the
Fair Work Act 2009 be amended and broadened for the purposes of an employee accessing
carer's leave. In addition to the current definition, the following persons should be classified
as 'immediate family':
• any person who is a member of an employee's household, and has been for a
continuous period of over 18 months;
• any of the employee's children (including adopted, step and ex-nuptial children);
• any of the employee's siblings (including a sibling of their spouse or de facto partner);
and
• any other person significant to the employee to whom the employee provides regular
care.
The Government agrees in part to this recommendation.
Family members captured by the first 3 bullet points of this recommendation are already
able to access carer’s leave under the Fair Work Act. Section 12 of the Fair Work Act defines
immediate family as the spouse, de facto partner, child, parent, grandparent, grandchild or
sibling of the employee, or of the employee’s spouse/de facto partner. Section 17 provides
that this includes step relations and adoptive relations. Sections 97 and 102 of the Fair Work
Act enable employees to use paid and unpaid personal/carer’s leave to care for both
immediate family and for a member of the employee’s household.
With respect to the fourth bullet point – “any other persons significant to the employee to
whom the employee provides regular care” – this form of relationship is not currently
included in the Fair Work Act’s carer’s leave definitions. However, the workplace relations
system enables employees and employers to agree to other arrangements tailored to the
employee’s caring responsibilities, including through enterprise bargaining. For instance,
carers within the meaning of the Carer Recognition Act 2021 are entitled to make requests
for flexible working arrangements under s 65(1A) of the Fair Work Act.
15
This recommendation is being considered by the Fair Work Commission as part of the
Modern Awards Review. The Commission’s work and care stream discussion paper notes
this recommendation and Question 15 of the paper asks:
Noting the Work and Care Final Report Recommendation 17, that the definition of
immediate family should be expanded, are there any specific variations in modern
awards that are necessary to ensure they continue to meet the modern awards
objective?7
The Government will consider this aspect of the recommendation further in light of the
outcomes of the Modern Awards Review, including any award variation proposals put
forward by parties.
Recommendation 18
The committee recommends the Australian Government consider the adequacy of existing
leave arrangements and investigate potential improvements in leave arrangements in the
Fair Work Act 2009, including separate carer's leave and personal leave.
Australian Greens’ Additional Recommendation 8
The Australian Greens recommend the Australian Government amend the National
Employment Standards under Division 7 of the Fair Work Act 2009, to separate carer's leave
and personal leave into unique leave entitlements.
These separate leave entitlements should:
• provide 10 days of paid carer's leave and a further 10 days of paid personal leave; and
• be available on a pro-rata basis to all casual, part-time and permanent employees who
have been engaged by an employer for at least six months.
The Government notes this recommendation and the Australian Greens’ additional
recommendation.
These recommendations are being considered by the Fair Work Commission as part of the
Modern Awards Review requested by the Minister for Employment and Workplace
Relations.
The Fair Work Commission’s work and care stream discussion paper notes this
recommendation and Question 17 asks:
Noting Senate Committee Recommendation 18, to consider separating
personal/carer’s leave entitlement, are there any specific variations in modern
awards that are necessary to ensure they continue to meet the modern awards
objective?8
The Government will consider the outcomes of the Modern Awards Review, including
findings relevant to the above recommendations.
7 Fair Work Commission, Discussion Paper – Work and Care (January 2024), p 139.
8 Fair Work Commission, Discussion Paper – Work and Care (January 2024), p 145.
16
Recommendation 19
The committee recommends the Australian Government request the Fair Work Commission
to review access to and compensation for paid sick and annual leave for casual and
part-time workers.
Australian Greens’ Additional Recommendation 7
The Australian Greens recommend the Australian Government amend the National
Employment Standards in the Fair Work Act 2009 to establish a right for all workers
(including casual workers) who have worked for a period of six months, to pro-rata paid sick
and holiday leave.
The Government notes this recommendation and the Australian Greens’ additional
recommendation.
Leave entitlements are being considered by the Fair Work Commission as part of the
Modern Awards Review requested by the Minister for Employment and Workplace
Relations. Both the work and care and job security stream discussion papers identified
recommendation 19 as a recommendation for consideration. The Government will consider
the outcomes of the Modern Awards Review once the Fair Work Commission’s Final Report
is published.
The Government is committed to protecting and facilitating workers’ access to entitlements
as provided for under the Fair Work Act and other relevant legislation, including through
legislative reform measures to prevent sham contracting and restore a fair, objective
definitions of employment and casual work. Together, these will help ensure fewer workers
miss out on leave entitlements due to misclassification.
Recommendation 25
The committee recommends the Australian Government respond to the recommendations
of the Senate Select Committee on Job Security as a matter of priority. The committee
reiterates those recommendations and calls on the Australian Government to:
• develop a new statutory definition of casual employment that reflects the true nature of
the employment relationship and is restricted to work that is genuinely intermittent,
seasonal or unpredictable; and
• restrict the use of low base hour contracts, which can be 'flexed up' without incurring
any pay penalty for additional hours worked beyond contract, and ensure permanent
part-time employees have access to regular, predicable patterns and hours of work. This
could include implementing penalty rates for any hours worked over the contracted
amount. For example, if an employee is contracted for 15 hours and their employer
rosters them for more, they should be paid a penalty rate for hours worked beyond the
contracted amount.
The committee further recommends that the Australian Government develop clearly
delineated statutory definitions of part-time and full-time employment and that these
definitions, as well as a definition of casual employment, be inserted into the
Fair Work Act 2009. These definitions should accurately reflect modern employment
relationships and address employers' use of widely accepted legal loopholes, which can
17
result in employment conditions that do not align with community expectations. In
particular, the growing trend of part-time work to function as a form of casual employment
without the benefit of casual loading.
The Government agrees in part to this recommendation.
The Government’s Secure Jobs, Better Pay and Closing Loopholes reforms to the Fair Work
Act partially address this recommendation.
This recommendation is being considered by the Fair Work Commission as part of the
Modern Awards Review requested by the Minister for Employment and Workplace
Relations. Both the work and care and job security stream discussion papers identified
recommendation 25 as a recommendation for consideration. The Government will consider
the outcomes of the Modern Awards Review once the Fair Work Commission’s Final Report
is published.
Job Security Select Committee
The Government is progressing its formal response to the Senate Select Committee on Job
Security’s reports. The Government further notes that the Job Security Committee’s findings
and recommendations played a substantial role in the development of legislative reforms
already undertaken in this term of Government.
Secure Jobs, Better Pay and Closing Loopholes
The Secure Jobs, Better Pay reforms added secure work and gender equality to the modern
awards objective and the object of the Fair Work Act. The Fair Work Commission, as part of
the Modern Awards Review, is considering how these changes to the purpose of the
legislation bear upon the modern award system.
The Closing Loopholes reforms implemented the Government’s commitment to legislating a
fair, objective test to determine when a worker can be classified as casual, and the new
definition will take effect from 26 August 2024. For employees who are effectively working
like a permanent employee, they will have a clear and simple way to choose to change to
permanent work. These reforms are in addition to other measures to address legal
loopholes that undercut conditions of work, including a fair definition of employment and
the establishment of the new framework for the Fair Work Commission to set minimum
standards for employee-like workers and in the road transport industry.
Recommendation 26
The committee recommends that the principle of equal pay for equal work should be
applied to gig workers, who currently do not have the same conditions and entitlements as
other workers. Gig workers should have the same rights regarding predictability of work,
liveable income, decent health and safety standards, and paid sick and holiday leave.
The committee further recommends the Australian Government remove incentives for gig
platforms to avoid workplace regulations.
The Government agrees in part to this recommendation.
18
The Government is strongly committed to delivering minimum workplace standards to
protect gig workers. The Government has legislated to empower the Fair Work Commission
to set minimum standards for employee-like workers in the gig economy. This change closes
the loophole that has left these workers without access to any minimum standards at all.
These changes commence on 26 August 2024, or earlier by proclamation.
Australia has ratified the International Labour Organization’s Equal Remuneration
Convention, 1951, and is committed to the implementation of equal pay for equal work
across all forms of work. In this respect, the Government’s Secure Jobs, Better Pay reforms
added gender equality as an express object of the Fair Work Act.
The employee-like framework is designed to ensure that employee-like workers receive fair
minimum standards that reflect the unique nature of digital platform work. It will be a
matter for the independent Fair Work Commission to determine which terms and
conditions will be set as minimum standards, having regard to the applications before it and
the requirements set out in legislation. This includes taking into account the objects of the
Fair Work Act, which include the need to promote gender equality.
This approach closes the loophole which has enabled digital labour platforms to avoid
workplace regulations. It creates a new framework which will ensure minimum standards
are fit-for-purpose for workers, consumers and platforms. In addition, the Government has
legislated to update the sham contracting provisions (and increase penalties) and insert an
objective definition of employment, to prevent misclassification of workers designed to limit
access to entitlements.
Employee-like workers will also be able to apply to the Fair Work Commission for dispute
resolution if they consider they have been unfairly deactivated by a digital labour platform.
The Government is strongly committed to ensuring all workers, including those in the gig
economy, have equal access to decent health and safety standards. The model Work Health
and Safety laws, adopted in the Commonwealth jurisdiction, extends to work performed in
non-standard work arrangements, as duties relate to ‘persons conducting a business or
undertaking’ and ‘workers’ (rather than ‘employers’ and ‘employees’). The national work
health and safety policy body, Safe Work Australia, monitors the implementation and
effectiveness of the model laws. This includes ensuring these duties are being applied
effectively in practice across modern work arrangements, such as the gig economy.
19
2.3 Working hours
Five Committee recommendations relate to working hours, rostering, and the standard
working week.
Under the National Employment Standards, an employer cannot request or require an
employee to work more than 38 hours of work in a week, unless the additional hours are
reasonable. In determining whether additional hours are reasonable or unreasonable, a
number of factors must be taken into account, such as any risk to employee health and
safety and the employee’s personal circumstances, including family responsibilities.
Employees also have the right to refuse to work any additional hours that are unreasonable.
2.3.1 Employee right to disconnect
The Closing Loopholes reforms included a new employee right to disconnect in the
Fair Work Act which makes clear that employees are not required to monitor, read, or
respond to employer or work-related contact out of hours, unless refusing to do so is
unreasonable.
The right to disconnect is a high level right, with factors to help employers determine
whether an employee’s refusal to monitor, read or respond to contact is unreasonable.
There are no obligations that limit employers or others from contacting or attempting to
contact employees – just protections for employees who reasonably switch off. Employees’
right to refuse employer or work-related contact (or attempted contact) out of hours will be
a workplace right, so the general protections in the Fair Work Act will apply. The Fair Work
Commission will be able to deal with disputes promptly, including by issuing stop orders.
The right to disconnect will apply to national system employees and employers, other than
small business employers and their employees, from 26 August 2024. Modern awards will
include a right to disconnect term from this date. For small business employers and
employees, the right to disconnect will not commence until 26 August 2025, providing
additional time for these employers and employees to make arrangements that suit their
workplace.
2.3.2 Modern awards and enterprise agreements
Modern awards and enterprise agreements can include terms dealing with maximum
weekly ordinary hours (which can be fewer than 38 ordinary hours per week), parameters
around working additional hours such as payment of overtime, and necessary breaks
between work applicable for overtime periods.
Modern awards and enterprise agreements must also include a term requiring the employer
to consult employees about a change to their regular roster or ordinary hours of work.
Employers must invite the employees to give their views about the impact of the change,
including any impact in relation to their family or caring responsibilities.
20
2.3.3 Work health and safety
The Government recognises the potential impact excessive working hours or unreasonable
expectations around presenteeism could have on the psychological health of workers.
Improving the understanding and management of such psychosocial hazards in Australian
workplaces is an ongoing priority for the Government.
On 1 April 2023, new Work Health and Safety Regulations on managing psychosocial hazards
at work came into effect in the Commonwealth jurisdiction. To support implementation of
the psychosocial regulations, a Code of Practice on managing psychosocial hazards in the
workplace for the Commonwealth jurisdiction is being finalised. The Government has also
committed $2 million over 2 years, from 2023 to 2025, to fund the development and
delivery of a ‘train-the-trainer’ program on workplace psychosocial hazards for Health and
Safety Representatives in the Commonwealth jurisdiction. The training will improve Health
and Safety Representatives’ psychosocial hazard literacy, and support implementation of
regulations on managing psychosocial risks.
Recommendation 21
The committee recommends, alongside its Interim Report recommendations to ensure
employees have predicable, stable rosters, the Australian Government supports a review by
the Fair Work Commission of current industrial awards, to require employers to give
advance notice of at least two weeks of rosters and roster changes (except in exceptional
circumstances) and genuinely consider employee views about the impact of proposed roster
changes and to accommodate the needs of the employee.
The committee further recommends the Australian Government support a review by the
FWC into current industrial awards, to ensure employees have a ‘right to say no’ to extra
hours with protection from negative consequences.
Interim Report Recommendation 5
The committee recommends that the Australian Government amend the Fair Work Act 2009
to provide improved rostering rights for employees, and in particular working carers, by:
• ensuring employers implement rostering practices that are predictable, stable and
focused on fixed shift scheduling (for example, fixed times and days); and
• amending section 145A of the Act to require employers genuinely consider employee
views about the impact of proposed roster changes, and take the views of the employee,
including working carers, into consideration when changing rosters and other work
arrangements.
The Government notes this recommendation and the Interim Report recommendation.
21
Rostering is being considered by the Fair Work Commission as part of the Modern Awards
Review requested by the Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations. In particular,
Question 8 of the Fair Work Commission’s discussion paper on work and care asks:
Noting the Work and Care Senate Committee Recommendation 21 that all employees
should have at least 2 weeks’ notice of their roster except in exceptional
circumstances, are there any specific variations to rostering provisions in modern
awards that are necessary to ensure they continue to meet the modern awards
objective?9
The Government will consider the outcomes of the Modern Awards Review once the Fair
Work Commission’s Final Report is published.
The Government’s Secure Jobs, Better Pay reforms introduced new secure work and gender
equality elements to the modern awards objective, which are under consideration, including
in relation to rostering arrangements as part of the Modern Awards Review.
Recommendation 22
The committee recommends the Australian Government write to the Fair Work Commission
suggesting a review of the operation of the 38-hour working week set in the National
Employment Standards, the extent and consequences of longer hours of work. The review
should also consider stronger penalties for long hours and other possible ways to reduce
them, including through the work, health and safety system which requires employers to
ensure safe working hours as a part of providing a safe workplace.
The Government notes this recommendation.
Working hours and overtime, time off in lieu, and make-up time provisions are being
broadly considered by the Fair Work Commission as part of the Modern Awards Review
requested by the Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations. The discussion paper
on work and care identified recommendation 22 as a recommendation for consideration.
The Government will consider the outcomes of the Modern Awards Review once the Fair
Work Commission’s Final Report is published.
The Government also acknowledges that psychosocial hazards such as excessive job
demands or low control can materialise in long working hours. These must be managed
under work health and safety laws. Regulatory reform has recently taken place in the
Commonwealth work health and safety jurisdiction and is underway in other states and
territories to improve psychosocial risk management in workplaces.
9 Fair Work Commission, Discussion Paper – Work and Care (January 2024), p 104.
22
Recommendation 23
The committee recommends the Australian Government consider amending the Fair Work
Act 2009 to include an enforceable ‘right to disconnect’ under the National Employment
Standards, giving all workers a right to disconnect once their contracted working hours have
finished and restricting employers from communicating with workers outside of work hours,
except in the event of an emergency or for welfare reasons.
The committee further recommends the Australian Government increase penalties for
employers who commit wage theft through, for example, unpaid additional hours of work
and consider changes to law that make these cases subject to criminal charges.
Interim Report Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the Australian Government amend the Fair Work Act 2009,
including section 65 of that Act, to:
• make the right to request flexible work available to all workers and to remove the stigma
attached to its use when confined to carers;
• replace the ‘reasonable business grounds’ provision at section 65(5) under which
employers can refuse a flexible working arrangement, with refusal only on the grounds of
‘unjustifiable hardship’;
• introduce a positive duty on employers to reasonably accommodate flexible working
arrangements;
• require consultation with workers about flexibility requests; and
• revise sections 738 and 739 of the Act to introduce a process of appeal to the Fair Work
Commission, for decisions made by employers under section 65 refusing to allow flexible
work arrangements on the grounds of unjustifiable hardship, or on ‘reasonable business
grounds’.
Interim Report Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations
investigate legislative reforms to the Fair Work Act 2009 and any other associated workplace
laws, to enact a ‘right to disconnect’ from work. This right should:
• enable and support productive work from home and flexibility of work;
• protect the right of workers to disconnect from their job outside of contracted hours and
to enforce this right with their employer;
• place a positive duty on employers to reasonably accommodate the right wherever
possible; and
• allow employees to appeal to the Fair Work Commission where the right is not being
enacted by employers.
Australian Greens’ Additional Recommendation 1
The Australian Greens recommend the Australian Government prioritise amendments to the
Fair Work Act 2009 to include an enforceable ‘right to disconnect’ under the National
Employment Standards
The Government agrees to this recommendation and agrees in part to the Interim Report
recommendations and the Australian Greens’ additional recommendation.
23
The Government supported a legislated a right to disconnect in the Fair Work Act through
the Closing Loophole reforms. These reforms also criminalise wage theft by introducing
criminal offences for intentional underpayment of employees’ wages and certain
entitlements and increase the civil penalties for wage underpayment in certain
circumstances.
The new right to disconnect provisions within the Fair Work Act makes clear that employees
are not required to monitor, read, or respond to employer or work-related contact out of
hours, unless refusing to do so is unreasonable. These changes start on 26 August 2024 for
non-small business employers and their employees, and on 26 August 2025 for small
business employers and employees.
The Fair Work Commission is also required to insert a right to disconnect term into all
modern awards and make written guidelines about how the right to disconnect will operate
by 26 August 2024. To do so, the Fair Work Commission is undertaking consultation and
engaging with interested parties. Parties can also negotiate rights to disconnect in their
enterprise agreements to reflect the needs of workers and their workplaces and some
workplaces already have a right to disconnect, or similar, in their agreement.
These build on the Secure Jobs, Better Pay reforms to strengthen the right to request
flexible working arrangements by making it an enforceable right, which reflect the
Government’s agreement in part to Interim Report Recommendation 3. The Fair Work
Commission can deal with disputes about requests for flexible working arrangements,
including by arbitration.
Recommendation 27
The committee recommends the Australian Government request the Fair Work Commission
undertake a review of standard working hours with a view to reducing the standard working
week.
The Government notes this recommendation.
Working hours are being broadly considered by the Fair Work Commission as part of the
Modern Awards Review requested by the Minister for Employment and Workplace
Relations. The discussion paper on work and care identified recommendation 27 as a
recommendation for consideration. The Government will consider the outcomes of the
Modern Awards Review once the Fair Work Commission’s Final Report is published.
24
Recommendation 28
The committee recommends the Australian Government undertake a four-day week trial
based on the 100:80:100 model whereby employees retain 100 per cent of the salary while
reducing their hours to 80 per cent while maintaining 100 per cent productivity. The trial
should be implemented in diverse sectors and geographical locations.
The Australian Government should partner with an Australian university throughout the trial
to measure the impact of a four-day week on productivity, health and wellbeing, workplace
cultural change, gender equality in the workplace as well as the impact on the distribution
of unpaid care across genders.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government is committed to improving access to flexible work and to operating as a
model employer. As an outcome of Australian Public Service enterprise bargaining, the
Commonwealth published a forward-leaning common clause on Flexible Working
Arrangements.
The common clause supports employees to request a range of flexibilities, such as
compressed working arrangements, part-time arrangements, altering the hours in which
work can be performed, and altering the location of work including work from home.
Requests are to be considered on their individual merits, with a bias to approval. The
common clause recognises that flexibility applies to all roles, and different types of flexible
working arrangements may be suitable for different types of roles or circumstances.
This entitlement is now in effect in Australian Public Service enterprise agreements and is
progressively coming into effect in other Commonwealth enterprise agreements as they are
voted up by employees and approved by the Fair Work Commission.
Claims for a four-day work week trial were not agreed in the recent round of APS-wide
enterprise bargaining.
Workplace flexibility is being considered as part of the Modern Awards Review requested by
the Minister for Employment and Workplace Relations. The discussion paper on work and
care identified Recommendation 28 as a recommendation for consideration. The
Government will consider the outcomes of the Modern Awards Review once the Fair Work
Commission’s Final Report is published.
25
3 Early Childhood Education and Care
The Committee identified ECEC as essential social infrastructure for carers to balance
working with caring for children and noted the interactions with other themes including
working hours, parental leave entitlements and impacts on First Nations peoples. The
importance of quality ECEC in narrowing inequality, and intergenerational inequity was
recognised by the Committee, as well as its impact on gender equality and wage equity. The
Committee called for a reinvigorated ECEC system to provide universally accessible, child-
focused, culturally appropriate care of high quality, and be supported by a properly paid and
equipped workforce. The Committee found these changes would increase access to ECEC,
further benefitting children, their carers and society.
The Government recognises the integral role that ECEC plays as the foundation for lifelong
learning and development. Investment in the sector and its workforce leads to a range of
benefits, including more equitable outcomes for children, increased social mobility, and
higher women's workforce participation. The ECEC sector is highly feminised; over 92 per
cent of the workforce are women. A highly skilled and professionally recognised workforce
improves outcomes for children, while affordable care ensures the benefits of quality ECEC
are available to families across Australia. As part of the 2024–25 Budget, the Government
committed to providing funding towards a wage increase for the ECEC workforce.
The Government has implemented Cheaper Child Care, directed the Productivity
Commission to undertake an inquiry into Australia’s ECEC system, commissioned the
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission inquiry into the ECEC market and
developed the whole-of-Commonwealth Early Years Strategy. The Government also made a
provision in the 2024–25 Budget to deliver on its commitment to provide funding towards a
wage increase for ECEC workers, with details to be finalised following Fair Work Commission
processes. The 2024–25 Budget also invested $30 million over 2 years from 2024–25 in IT
and payment services to deliver on this commitment. These initiatives, and other
improvements to the sector help address the Committee’s recommendations for the ECEC
system.
3.1 Australia’s ECEC system
Australia has a national system to assist families with the cost of ECEC, as well as national
standards for ECEC services. In addition to implementing Cheaper Child Care, the
Government has multiple initiatives underway to improve the ECEC system.
3.1.1 Productivity Commission Inquiry
The Government has tasked the Productivity Commission with undertaking a
comprehensive inquiry into Australia’s ECEC system to help chart a course for universal,
affordable ECEC. The Productivity Commission released its draft report on
23 November 2023 and will provide its final report to the Government by 30 June 2024.
26
As part of the Government’s reform agenda, the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission was directed to hold an inquiry into ECEC prices. The Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission released its final report on 29 January 2024. This will be
considered alongside the Productivity Commission’s inquiry into ECEC.
3.1.2 Early Years Strategy and National Vision for ECEC
These inquiries are complemented by the whole-of-Commonwealth Early Years Strategy
2024–2034 (the Strategy). The Strategy:
• articulates how the Australian Government will prioritise and support child-centred
policy development, and target investment in early years supports and services over the
next 10 years, and
• seeks to support improved coordination between Commonwealth programs and funding
impacting early childhood development.
In addition, National Cabinet tasked education and early years ministers with developing a
National long-term vision for the ECEC sector to guide future reform. The draft National
ECEC vision covers all forms of ECEC, including preschool and all forms of education and
care. It recognises that:
• quality ECEC has learning and development benefits for children in the most formative
period of their lives. This can be especially significant for children from vulnerable and
disadvantaged communities; and
• an affordable and accessible ECEC system supports parents to work and study, especially
women. This in turn supports the Australian economy to grow and prosper.
3.1.3 Community Child Care Fund
The Community Child Care Fund Open program helps services address barriers to ECEC
participation. The Community Child Care Fund Establishing Child Care in Limited Supply
Areas round was designed to establish new early childhood services in the most
disadvantaged regional or remote communities, where there is a gap in the supply of
approved services. In October 2023, the Government announced that 47 services, across
38 communities, would receive funding to establish new Centre Based Day Care services and
Family Day Care premises in areas of limited supply. The Community Child Care Fund
Limited Supply grant opportunity will provide a total of $16 million over 2 years, in
establishment and capital support funding to successful grant recipients. Further, funding of
around $84 million will be available for Community Child Care Fund Round Four from
1 July 2024 to 30 June 2026 to help support ECEC services address barriers to participation,
particularly targeting disadvantaged and vulnerable families and communities, and services
in regional, remote, and very remote areas.
3.1.4 National Agreement on Closing the Gap
The Government is also committed to embedding the Priority Reforms under the National
Agreement on Closing the Gap (National Agreement), including Priority Reform Two
(Building the Community-Controlled Sector) and through the Early Childhood Care and
Development Policy Partnership under Priority Reform One (Formal Partnerships and Shared
27
Decision Making). Through the National Agreement, Government Parties have agreed to
implement measures to increase the proportion of services delivered by First Nations
organisations, particularly community-controlled organisations.
The Government is also investing in targeted initiatives to support First Nations children to
participate in and access high-quality services. This includes continuing to expand the
Connected Beginnings program to 50 sites nationally by 2025. Connected Beginnings aims to
support First Nations children to be school ready through the integration of early childhood
education, health and family support services support services and programs in each
community. In addition, the Government is working to expand the Community Child Care
Fund Restricted program, establishing new, high quality and mostly community controlled
ECEC services in mainly remote and very remote areas to support First Nations children and
families.
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends the National Cabinet develop a framework for and progress
the implementation of a universal, quality, place-based and child-centred early childhood
education and care (ECEC) system. The new ECEC framework should be developed within 12
months and:
• be supported by a clear policy framework which seeks to strengthen outcomes for
children, their carers, childhood educators and childcare providers;
• be developed with active consideration of working carers, and especially women, to
support better access to paid employment (including outside of core hours) while
balancing work and care responsibilities; and/or set rosters that include caring
responsibilities; and
• address ‘childcare deserts’ by providing ECEC facilities in rural, remote and some
regional areas, and ensure culturally-appropriate, community managed and trauma-
informed ECEC is made available where needed, especially in First Nations communities.
The committee further recommends that the Australian Government continue to regularly
review ECEC systems for adequacy, and undertake appropriate changes, with a view to
universal, early childhood education and care.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government implemented Cheaper Child Care and commissioned the Productivity
Commission with conducting a comprehensive inquiry into Australia’s ECEC system. The
Productivity Commission will make recommendations to support affordable, accessible,
equitable and high-quality ECEC that reduces barriers to workforce participation and
supports children’s learning.
The Government has also launched the Early Years Strategy 2024–2034, which sets out the
Government’s vision to best support Australia’s children and their families. Practical steps to
achieve the vision in the Strategy will be outlined in 3 Action Plans to be released over the
ten-year lifetime of the document. The first will be released later this year, along with an
Outcomes Framework.
28
The Government is also committed to embedding the Priority Reforms under the National
Agreement, including Priority Reform Two (Building the Community-controlled Sector) and
Priority Reform One (Formal Partnerships and Shared Decision Making), through the Early
Childhood Care and Development Policy Partnership.
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the Australian Government work through National
Cabinet to develop a framework for a universal early childhood education and care (ECEC)
system that is consistent across Australia. This framework should be implemented with a
view to increase access to quality ECEC and lower its costs.
Interim Report Recommendation 7
The committee recommends that in the upcoming 2022–23 Budget, the Australian
Government commits to long-term increases in funding to First Nations community-
controlled Early Childhood Education and Care, with a particular focus on regional, remote
and some urban areas.
Australian Greens’ Additional Recommendation 2
The Australian Greens recommend the provision of free early childhood education and care
to families.
The Government notes this recommendation, the Interim Report recommendation and the
Australian Greens’ additional recommendation.
The Government implemented Cheaper Child Care as well as commissioned the Productivity
Commission with conducting a comprehensive inquiry into Australia’s ECEC system to make
recommendations to support affordable, accessible, equitable and high-quality ECEC that
reduces barriers to workforce participation and supports children’s learning.
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends the Australian Government consider the provision of a further
100 publicly owned early childhood education and care centres (including centres operated
by local government), in areas identified as ‘childcare deserts’ and/or as having unmet
demand. The centres should provide holistic, culturally appropriate, and trauma-informed
services to children.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government supports ECEC sector services through the Community Child Care Fund to
further address barriers to participation in ECEC in disadvantaged, regional and remote
communities. The Community Child Care Fund is funding approximately $614 million over 4
years (2023–24 to 2026–27) and currently funds 900 services, including Connected
Beginnings sites.
In August 2021, the Government announced an additional $29.9 million over 4 years to
establish new Community Child Care Fund (Restricted) services in mainly remote locations.
29
The funding is part of the Government’s commitment to achieving the Closing the Gap
targets. The Department of Education is working with First Nations peak bodies,
communities and organisations to establish these new services. In 2023, the first 8 sites
were announced.
The Productivity Commission inquiry into Australia’s ECEC system will identify solutions to
help chart a course to universal ECEC.
3.2 Subsidised care for children
The Child Care Subsidy is the primary way the Government helps families with ECEC fees.
The Government introduced changes to the Child Care Subsidy from July 2023 that have
reduced the cost of ECEC and made it easier for parents and working carers to participate in
paid work. This is particularly the case for women, who are more likely than men to be the
primary carer of children, and more likely to have the cost of ECEC factored against their
earnings.
From July 2023, Child Care Subsidy rates lifted to 90 per cent for families with a combined
annual income of $80,000 or less and increase for eligible families with a combined annual
income less than $530,000. Supporting women to increase their participation, if they choose
to, by reducing ECEC costs, will boost the economy and help close the gap between
women’s and men’s long-term economic security.
3.2.1 Preschool Reform Agreement
Preschool in Australia is a shared responsibility between the Commonwealth and state and
territory governments, with state and territory governments primarily responsible for
delivery. The Government’s current focus for preschool under the Preschool Reform
Agreement is on children in the year before fulltime school ensuring all children are
receiving the full benefit of at least one year of preschool participation (for 600 hours). To
see the full benefits of a quality preschool program, children need to be attending for the
full 600 hours – not just be enrolled. That is why the Preschool Reform Agreement seeks to
drive improvements in preschool attendance in the year before fulltime school, particularly
for disadvantaged and First Nations cohorts.
In relation to the Committee’s use of the term ‘subsidised care’, the Preschool Reform
Agreement does not directly provide for subsidised care for children attending a preschool
program. The Government provides a contribution to states and territories based on the
number of children in the year before fulltime school ($1377.83 per child in 2023). States
and territories can choose to pass this on to reduce fees for families or to improve preschool
quality, in line with Preschool Reform Agreement funding follows the child requirements.
Most families who access a preschool program in an approved Centre Based Day Care
setting are eligible for subsidised care through the Child Care Subsidy. The Government also
provides significant funding support nationally for 3-year-olds in ECEC settings. In the 2023
December quarter, 66.6 per cent of all 3-year-olds in ECEC settings, around 200,000
children, were eligible for the Child Care Subsidy.
30
3.2.2 Inclusion Support Program
The Inclusion Support Program was reviewed in 2023, with a report released in November
2023. The report made 21 findings, identified 21 short and medium-term opportunities to
strengthen the program and recommended 5 longer-term opportunities to embed inclusion
in the sector. The review aimed to assess the efficiency and effectiveness of the current
Inclusion Support Program delivery model across the ECEC sector and explore alternative
policy settings. The review considered interactions with other programs, like the National
Disability Insurance Scheme.
The review found that program resources are not being directed towards the activities
which will have the greatest impact, such as workforce inclusion capability uplift. The
current emphasis on providing Inclusion Development Fund subsidies for additional
educators does not lead to increased capability, as these educators are used to supplement
staffing ratios rather than embed inclusive practice.
The review has informed the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission price
inquiry and will feed into the Productivity Commission inquiry into the ECEC system.
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends the Australian Government request the Productivity
Commission to identify ways to extend the Preschool Reform Agreement (PRA) to both
three- and four-year old children, to ensure that all children can access early childhood
education and care in the two years prior to commencing school.
The committee further recommends that the hours of subsidised care provided for by the
PRA be increased, to a minimum of 15 hours a week (600 hours a year) and a maximum of
30 hours a week (1200 hours a year), based on the needs of the child and their carers.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The new preschool outcomes measure under the Preschool Reform Agreement will enable
measurement of, build domestic evidence for, and understand the ‘value add’ of the year
before fulltime school. Subject to a successful trial and implementation, data and evidence
will be available to inform future policy considerations and government investment, to
maximise the outcomes for children in the year before fulltime school in the Australian
context. Should governments agree to utilise this data the new preschool outcomes
measure has the potential to assist all levels of government to identify the effectiveness of
national and state and territory-led initiatives.
Future Government policy considerations, including any expansion of preschool funding or
increases to dosage supported under the Preschool Reform Agreement, will be informed by
the implementation of the Preschool Reform Agreement reform agenda, the outcomes of
the Productivity Commission inquiry into Australia’s ECEC system, the Australian
Competition and Consumer Commission price inquiry, the Government’s Early Years
Strategy, and the National ECEC vision.
31
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends the Australian Government request the Productivity
Commission to immediately review the Inclusion Support Program and consider appropriate
action including, but not limited to the commitment of additional funding of the program,
with a view to provide extra support to children who have additional needs to participate in
ECEC. Indexation of funding should also be considered.
Australian Greens’ Additional Recommendation 3
The Australian Greens recommend the Australian Government provide additional funding to
the Inclusion Support Program (ISP) and implement revised guidelines for the ISP which:
• remove the cap on additional educator hours, and instead align funded additional
educator hours with the needs and enrolled hours of a child; and
• ensure that the annual funding allocation to the ISP is properly indexed and aligns with
the wages of early childhood educators.
The Government notes this recommendation and the Australian Greens’ additional
recommendation.
The Productivity Commission inquiry into Australia’s ECEC system has been directed to
options that improve access to quality ECEC and outcomes for children with additional
needs.
An additional $98.4 million was provided in the 2024–25 Federal Budget to the Inclusion
Support Program. This funding will help meet expected demand for services to embed
inclusion and support children with additional needs.
Recommendation 29
Noting that the Productivity Commission will consider and report findings on the abolition of
the Child Care Subsidy activity test, the committee recommends the Australian Government
consider amending the relevant social policy and family assistance laws to abolish activity
tests.
Interim Report Recommendation 8
The committee recommends that the Australian Government amend the relevant Social
Policy and Family Assistance Laws to ensure that First Nations people are not required to
meet the requirements of the activity test in order to receive subsidised child care.
Australian Greens’ Additional Recommendation 9
The Australian Greens recommend the Australian Government amend, as a matter of
urgency, the relevant social policy and family assistance laws to abolish the activity test for
eligibility for the Child Care Subsidy.
The Government notes this recommendation, the Interim Report recommendation and the
Australian Greens’ additional recommendation.
32
The Productivity Commission is undertaking a comprehensive inquiry into Australia’s ECEC
system. The Inquiry will make recommendations to support affordable, accessible and
inclusive ECEC that reduces barriers to workforce participation and supports children’s
learning and development. The Inquiry will consider activity requirements in this context.
To support early childhood outcomes under the National Agreement on Closing the Gap, the
Government has taken early action since July 2023, and is providing 36 subsidised hours per
fortnight of ECEC base entitlement for First Nations children.
33
4 Targeted Support
The Committee noted that the experience of combining work and care changes across
individuals, families, genders, abilities, and social groups. The Committee considered
evidence addressing groups with unique work and care circumstances, including young
people, First Nations communities, people with disability, and culturally and linguistically
diverse communities. Concerns regarding the adequacy of wages, flexibility, and leave
entitlements in the paid care sector were also examined by the Committee.
The Committee considered mechanisms for the Government to support Australians
balancing work and care responsibilities. It acknowledged the Government has made
significant improvements to encourage the workforce participation of women, including
expanding the Government’s Paid Parental Leave scheme, steps to enforce the right to
request flexible working arrangements and child care support.
Many government policies and programs provide support for carers, workers, and those
seeking employment. The Government is investing in policies and programs to provide
support for these individuals. For example, in October 2023 the Government launched a
Carer Inclusive Workplace Initiative, which aims to expand carer inclusivity in workplaces
around Australia and enable businesses, in particular small businesses, to self-identify as
committed to carer inclusivity without the time commitment and cost associated with a full
accreditation process. This will help carers identify workplaces that understand the
challenges carers may face in employment while balancing work and caring responsibilities
and will accommodate flexibilities so that carers can maintain employment.
The Government has already started supporting Australians to combine their jobs with care
for others. This chapter describes policies, programs, reviews, and targeted initiatives that
support the care workforce, the supported employment sector, carers, people seeking
employment and workers.
The development of a new National Carer Strategy will seek to gather further information
through a national consultation process on issues facing unpaid carers, including workforce
participation and flexibility.
4.1 Care workforce
The care workforce is female-dominated and low paid relative to other industries, partly
reflecting the undervaluation of women’s care by employers and institutions.
4.1.1 Care workforce pay and conditions
As described in the “Flexible and Supportive Workplaces” chapter, the Government has
ensured through the Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Secure Jobs, Better Pay) Act 2022
that gender equality and job security are at the heart of the Fair Work Commission’s
decision-making. The Fair Work Commission is now properly equipped to help address pay
and conditions in low-paid, feminised workforces like the care sector.
34
The Government has also provided funding to support increases to award wages for many
aged care workers, as per the Fair Work Commission’s interim decision of 21 February 2023.
The 2023–24 Budget included $11.3 billion over 4 years to fund the Fair Work Commission’s
interim 15 per cent pay rise for many aged care workers from 30 June 2023, delivering on
the Government’s election commitments.
In March 2024, the Fair Work Commission found that the work of aged care sector
employees was historically undervalued because of assumptions based on gender. Based on
this and other work value considerations, the Fair Work Commission awarded increases to
minimum award wages of up to 28.5 per cent, inclusive of the interim increase awarded in
2023. The Fair Work Commission has not yet set a commencement date for these wage
increases. Aged care nurses were not included in this decision, with a decision on increases
to their award wages expected later in 2024. The Government has made provision in the
2024–25 Budget for these wage increases.
Furthermore, as part of the 2024–25 Budget, the Government provisioned funding to
support increases to award wages for aged care workers and funding towards a wage
increase for ECEC workers, with details to be finalised following Fair Work Commission
processes.
Through the Modern Awards Review 2023–24, the Fair Work Commission has been
undertaking research and consultation in relation to the provisions in care sector awards:
• The making awards easier to use stream is considering proposals on opportunities to
make the 7 most commonly used awards easier to use, which includes the Children's
Services Award 2010 and the Social, Community, Home Care and Disability Services
Industry Award 2010.
• The job security stream is considering the need to improve access to secure work
across the economy for all awards, and its discussion paper included a comparative
analysis of provisions in these 7 most commonly used awards.
• The work and care stream is considering work and care provisions for all awards, and
its discussion paper analyses 25 modern awards including these 7 most commonly
used awards as well as awards referred to in the Committee’s Final Report (Aged
Care Award 2010, Health Professionals and Support Services Award 2020, Nurses
Award 2020, Educational Services (Schools) General Staff Award 2020, Higher
Education Industry - General Staff - Award 2020 and the Local Government Industry
Award 2020).
The Fair Work Commission has also undertaken a research project into gender pay equity,
which informed the Expert Panel consideration of issues arising in connection with the
gender equality objectives of the Fair Work Act 2009 in the Annual Wage Review 2023–24.
• Stage 1 of this research10 identified 13 modern awards used to set pay in 29 large,
highly feminised occupations, including the Aged Care Award 2010, Nurses Award
2020, Social, Community, Home Care and Disability Services Industry Award 2010,
Children’s Services Award 2010, Health Professionals and Support Services Award
10 Cortis, N., Naidoo, Y., Wong, M. and Bradbury, B. (2023). Gender-based Occupational Segregation: A
National Data Profile. Sydney: UNSW Social Policy Research Centre.
35
2020, Educational Services (Schools) General Staff Award 2020, Educational Services
(Teachers) Award 2020, and the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Workers
and Practitioners and Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Award 2020.
• Stage 2 of this research examined the history of 12 of the 13 awards identified in
Stage 1 to determine whether the Fair Work Commission (or its predecessors or,
where relevant, State tribunals) had ever undertaken a comprehensive work value
assessment of classifications within the awards and to identify any other indicia of
historic gender-based undervaluation.
Following its Annual Wage Review 2023–24 decision, the Fair Work Commission has
initiated proceedings on its own motion pursuant to section 157 of the Fair Work Act 2009
concerning the following awards:
• Children’s Services Award 2010
• Social, Community, Home Care and Disability Services Industry Award 2010
• Health Professionals and Support Services Award 2020
• Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Workers and Practitioners and Aboriginal
Community Controlled Health Services Award 2020, and
• Pharmacy Industry Award 2020.
The Fair Work Commission will determine if it needs to vary minimum wages in these
modern awards for work value reasons, including to ensure that the consideration of work
value is free of assumptions based on gender.
4.1.2 First Nations care workforce
The Government also recognises that a strong First Nations care workforce is key to
ensuring cultural safety. Strategic Direction 3 of the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Health Workforce Strategic Framework and Implementation Plan 2021–2031 seeks
to ensure First Nations people are employed in culturally safe and responsive workplace
environments. In April 2023, National Cabinet also agreed to work together to progress a
first tranche of reforms to grow the First Nations care and support workforce.
The National Medical Workforce Strategy 2021–2031 will guide long-term collaborative
medical workforce planning across Australia. It identifies achievable, practical actions to
build a sustainable, highly trained medical workforce. Cultural safety is a cross cutting
theme of the National Medical Workforce Strategy and is seen as important for early
implementation to grow the First Nations medical workforce and provide a safe
environment for First Nations peoples to give and receive care. The National Medical
Workforce Strategy includes actions to improve cultural safety and the capacity of the
medical workforce to create and maintain culturally safe environments for First Nations
doctors, patients, and other health professionals.
Better equipping First Nations organisations to implement care services is in line with the
Government’s commitment to Priority Reform Two of the National Agreement on Closing
the Gap. This is supported by existing policies including the Closing the Gap Implementation
Plan. As identified in the National Agreement on Closing the Gap, the health sector was one
of the initial sectors identified for strengthening. A Health Sector Strengthening Plan was
36
agreed-in-principle through the Joint Council on Closing the Gap in December 2021 and
includes 4 streams: workforce; capital infrastructure; service provision; and governance.
Under Clause 55(b) of the National Agreement on Closing the Gap, the Commonwealth
Government is working with the Coalition of Peaks to identify evidence-led approaches to
applying a ‘meaningful proportion’ of funding to First Nations organisations.
The Government also recognises that First Nations registered training organisations play an
important role in delivering culturally appropriate training, as well as lifting the participation
of First Nations peoples in vocational education and training.
Recommendation 13
The committee recommends the Department of Health and Aged Care and the National
Indigenous Australians Agency develop processes to ensure that:
• care services for First Nations people transition to First Nations community-controlled
organisations; and
• culturally appropriate training in care service sectors is available to workers providing
care to First Nations communities, especially in regional, remote and some urban areas.
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Government supports increasing the availability of capacity building programs to
support the transition to community-controlled organisations, to ensure that demand can
be adequately met for First Nations people to receive culturally safe, skilled and local care
and support services, and that intersectional care needs are accounted for. This is
complemented by the Government’s Integrated Care and Commissioning Project that is
trialling collaborative, place-based and innovative approaches to improve service availability
across health, aged care, disability, and veterans’ care sectors for people living in regional,
rural and remote communities, and for First Nations peoples in targeted urban areas.
The Government has announced a new Remote Jobs and Economic Development Program
as part of its commitment to replace the Community Development Program. Developed in
partnership with First Nations people, it will support people in remote communities to move
into employment by funding meaningful jobs that communities want and will give more
flexibility to communities to identify local job needs and projects, including in the care
services sector. The design of the program is being informed by consultations with remote
communities and stakeholders to understand how to create flexibility in a national program
that takes into account local conditions and how the program can create career pathways
for local people to gain experience in a real job.
Through the Northern Territory Pathways to Community Control program, the
Commonwealth Government has a longstanding commitment to working towards greater
levels of Aboriginal community control in the delivery of primary health care in the Northern
Territory.
37
For example, the Government currently funds transition activities for the transfer of
Northern Territory Health clinics in Jabiru to Red Lily Health Board in West Arnhem and
Kaltukatjara to Central Australian Aboriginal Congress in Central Australia.
The Government supports increasing the availability of culturally appropriate training in care
service sectors to workers providing care to First Nations individuals and communities.
The Government is working with the states and territories to support First Nations students
and apprentices, working closely with First Nations people, their communities and training
providers to support skill development and career opportunities, including increasing the
availability of culturally appropriate training through the new National Skills Agreement
which commenced on 1 January 2024.
Recommendation 15
The committee recommends the Australian Government support workers and their
representatives in the care sector to use the mechanisms available to them through the Fair
Work Legislation Amendment (Secure Jobs, Better Pay) Act 2022 to achieve wage increases.
This could include care sector workers and their representatives accessing the supported
bargaining stream, initiating an application for an equal remuneration order, or a work value
claim.
The committee further recommends the Australian Government support a priority
application to the Fair Work Commission (FWC) through the newly established care and
community sector expert panel, for award wage increases for all care sectors including early
childhood education, disability care and aged care, and all sectors covered by the relevant
early childcare, and Social, Community Home Care and Disability Services Industry (SCHADS)
Awards.
In order to address pay equity and to stem the flow of workers out of the care sector, such a
priority application should draw the FWC’s attention to:
• the need to reconsider and appropriately reward classifications, wage structures,
conditions and entitlements across all care sectors and awards, and under the SCHADS
Award. This consideration should include appropriate relative pay across the care sector
reflecting the nature of work and qualifications, skills and experience. It should also
recognise the impact of gender on caring roles and the unique skills, variability and value
of care work;
• the appropriateness of care sector employees receiving payments for work-related
travel time, administrative responsibilities and engagement with essential training; and
• the appropriateness of a minimum shift call-in time across the care sector (for example,
a four-hour minimum or another identified suitable minimum period).
The Australian Government should consider mechanisms to fund and implement, in
accordance with historical practice, any wage increases and improved conditions agreed to
by the FWC.
38
Interim Report Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that the Australian Government develop an analysis of care
work classifications and wage structures to systematically address underpayments and lift
wages in the care sector. Such an analysis should:
• consider the variability and value of work across the care sector;
• establish the interrelationships across care types; and
• recognise the inherent value of care work.
Australian Greens’ Additional Recommendation 4
The Australian Greens recommend the Australian Government appropriately fund any pay
increases and improved classifications and conditions for care workers decided by the Fair
Work Commission.
The Government agrees in part to this recommendation and notes the Interim Report
recommendation and Australian Greens’ additional recommendation.
The Fair Work Commission is responsible for setting minimum wages and conditions at an
industry and occupational level through modern awards. Parties with standing can apply to
the Fair Work Commission to vary the terms of a modern award at any time.
Noting that different modern awards apply to different care workers, parties in the
identified care sectors may apply to the Fair Work Commission for wage increases and
improved conditions, or the Fair Work Commission could consider these awards on its own
motion.
To support such applications, the Secure Jobs, Better Pay reforms established new
requirements for Expert Panels in the Fair Work Commission to hear and decide pay equity
claims and relevant award variation applications.
In future Fair Work Commission proceedings, or in the event of future proceedings, the
Government will consider the appropriateness of mechanisms to fund and implement wage
increases. For example, in the 2023–24 Budget, the Government provided $11.3 billion over
4 years to fund the Fair Work Commission’s interim 15 per cent pay rise for many aged care
workers from 30 June 2023. Additionally, the Government has committed to providing
funding towards a wage increase for ECEC workers, with details to be settled following Fair
Work Commission processes.
Following its Annual Wage Review 2023–24 decision, the Fair Work Commission has
initiated proceedings on its own motion to determine if it needs to vary minimum wages for
work value reasons in a number of identified modern awards, including the Social,
Community, Home Care and Disability Services Industry Award 2010.
39
4.2 Supported employment sector
The Government is committed to working with stakeholders to evolve the supported
employment sector into modern, commercially viable social enterprises that better meet
community expectations and provide greater choice and control in employment for people
with disability.
Recommendation 14
The committee recommends the Australian Government undertake further work in relation
to the supported employment sector, including Australian Disability Enterprises (ADEs), to
ensure that they meet community expectations, and both improve and increase pathways
for disabled people into open employment. This work should build on work already being
progressed through the Disability Reform Ministerial Council.
Australian Greens’ Additional Recommendation 14
The Australian Greens recommend the Department of Social Services develop and implement
a plan to phase out Australian Disability Enterprises and increase pathways and supports for
disabled people to gain and maintain positions in open employment.
The Government agrees to this recommendation and notes the Australian Greens’
additional recommendation.
As part of the 2023–24 Budget, the Government is investing $57 million over 4 years to:
• create ongoing employment opportunities for people with disability with high support
needs
• assist the supported employment sector to evolve to better meet community
expectations, and
• provide people with disability with high support needs, their families and carers with
access to advocacy support and information to build their confidence and understanding
about rights and options at work.
On 11 January 2024, the Government published the Commonwealth, State and Territory
Supported Employment Plan to enact the guiding principles for the future of supported
employment.
The first tranche of the committed funding is in alignment with the guiding principles and
was announced on 23 April 2024. The announcement include:
• $14.9 million to 32 organisations for the first round of the Structural Adjustment Fund
• $9.8 million to deliver the Disability Employment Advocacy and Information Program,
and
• $1.4 million to deliver Disability Employment Expos.
The Department of Social Services consulted with key stakeholders including people with
disability with high support needs, as well as supported employment providers, on the
design of these budget measures to ensure supports are appropriately targeted.
40
The Government notes that the Final Report of the Royal Commission into Violence, Abuse,
Neglect and Exploitation of Disability also made recommendations in relation to supported
employment. All levels of government have committed to working together to provide an
initial response to the Disability Royal Commission in mid-2024.
In the 2024–25 Budget, the Government also announced a new Specialised Disability
Employment Program to replace the current Disability Employment Services Program from
1 July 2025. A key feature of the new program is expanding eligibility to people with
disability with a work capacity of less than 8 hours per week in order to provide more
diverse pathways into open employment for people with disability.
The new program will be complemented by establishing a Disability Employment Centre of
Excellence, which will be an evidence-informed, best-practice hub that will provide
resources, tools and training to help providers deliver quality employment services and
supports to both participants with disability and employers. It will also play a key role in
building the skills and capacity of providers of supported employment — including
Australian Disability Enterprises.
4.3 Carers
The Government values the immense contribution carers make to the lives of the people
they care for and the broader community and is committed to ensuring carers have access
to practical, emotional and financial supports to assist them in their caring role.
The Government recognises that balancing care responsibilities within the context of
employment can make it challenging for unpaid carers to participate in employment,
education and when seeking social connections. The intersections of additional experiences
of marginalisation and diversity, such as culturally and linguistically diverse and First Nations
peoples, can compound these challenges. These issues will be further explored through the
development of a new National Carer Strategy with the goal to provide comprehensive
action plans to address these challenges.
4.3.1 Carer supports
The Government delivers a range of programs to support carers and their individual needs,
particularly through Carer Gateway and providing financial assistance through payments
and concessions. This is consistent with the Government’s commitment to a strong a social
security safety net.
Through Carer Gateway, the Government provides tailored support to carers to meet their
individual needs and circumstances. This tailored support may include provision of
assistance that directly contributes to supporting carers to continue in the workforce, their
education, to undertake training courses, to enter/re-enter the workforce and/or upskill for
employment opportunities. This support may include:
• access to planned respite for care recipient/s enabling carers to attend
education/training sessions either in-person or online
41
• provision of equipment (for example purchasing a laptop and providing internet
access), and
• funding for education/training courses.
The Department of Social Services has commissioned an evaluation of carer support
programs, including Carer Gateway.
Pensions, including Carer Payment, are generally paid at the highest legislated rate of
income support in the Australian social security system. Base pensions are indexed twice a
year in March and September to the higher of the increase in the Consumer Price Index and
the increase in the Pensioner and Beneficiary Living Cost Index. The Pensioner and
Beneficiary Living Cost Index basket of goods and services is weighted to recognise that
pensioners spend more of their income on essentials. Base pension rates are also
benchmarked to Male Total Average Weekly Earnings. These arrangements ensure pension
rates are responsive to pensioners’ actual living cost increases and keep pace with
community living standards as measured by wages.
The Government is committed to supporting young carers. Through Carers Australia, the
Government funds the Young Carers Network, as well as the Young Carer Bursary Program
that assists eligible carers aged 25 years and under to continue or return to study. On
26 April 2023, the Government announced additional funding of $3 million a year for the
Young Carer Bursary Program, increasing the number of bursaries offered from 1,000 to
around 1,600 and bursary payments from $3,000 to $3,768 each year, in recognition of the
increased cost of living and challenges faced in balancing study and caring responsibilities.
4.3.2 Mental health services and resources
The Government also currently funds a range of services and resources to assist young
people experiencing mental ill health, including carers.
headspace is the Australian Government’s primary national platform for provision of
services to young people aged 12 to 25 experiencing, or at risk of, mild to moderate mental
illness. headspace is a trusted model of care that is recognised by young people, their
families, carers and communities for providing youth friendly mental health support. The
Individual Placement and Support program is delivered in 50 headspace centres nationally
to help young people, including young carers, achieve their education and employment
goals.
To complement the Individual Placement and Support program the Government funds the
Digital Work and Study Service. The Digital Work and Study Service is a unique integrated
clinical and vocational work and study service providing support to young people with
mental ill health, via a digital platform.
42
The Digital Work and Study Service complements the Individual Placement and Support
program by reducing waitlists and providing priority access to young people in regional and
remote locations and First Nations people. The Digital Work and Study Service also offers
participants the opportunity to link with a volunteer mentor through partnerships with
employers and industry both locally and nationally.
The Individual Placement and Support program and the Digital Work and Study Service are
currently being evaluated. Evaluation findings will inform decisions on continued service
delivery models, referral pathways, the community engagement model and inform how
these programs could be integrated into future employment program reforms.
The Government also funds Primary Health Networks to plan and commission regionally
appropriate mental health and suicide prevention services within a person-centred stepped
care approach that matches services to local need. Each Primary Health Network is required
to ensure services respond to a range of mental health needs, from early intervention for
mild and moderate conditions to more severe forms of mental illness.
The Government is also investing in services to increase access to mental health care in the
community for all Australians, including those with caring responsibilities and people from
culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds. This includes through enhancing the clinical
capacity and reach of the national network of Medicare Mental Health Centres (formerly
Head to Health), piloting the Individual Placement and Support program in 2 centres.
Medicare Mental Health Centres provide a safe and welcoming place to access mental
health information, services and supports delivered by multidisciplinary care teams, without
needing a prior appointment. Medicare Mental Health Centre services are free, and you do
not need a GP referral or Medicare card to access them.
The national Head to Health Phone Service provides additional support to access community
based mental health services. The Head to Health Phone Service is operating nationally and
anyone in Australia can call 1800 595 212 (between 8.30am and 5pm weekdays) and speak
with a trained professional for advice, information, and referral into the most appropriate
mental health support according to their needs. This may involve referral into a free or low-
cost mental health service in the person’s local area, depending on what best meets their
individual circumstances. Anyone seeking language support can access the Translating and
Interpreting Service (TIS National) by calling 131 450, advising the operator of their spoken
language and asking the interpreter to call Head to Health on 1800 592 212. The national
Head to Health website is also available and provides access to digital and low intensity
mental health support offerings from trusted providers.
The Government has also announced $7.5 million to establish and operate 2 independent
national mental health lived experience peak bodies. One representing consumers and the
other representing families, carers and kin. This is part of the Government’s overall
investment of $8.5 million to support those with a lived or living experience of mental
ill-health to shape the policies and programs affecting them.
43
The 2 new peak bodies are on track to be operational by mid-2024. Once established, these
2 independent national bodies will amplify the voices of consumers and carers to improve
mental health and suicide prevention outcomes for all Australians.
This follows work led by the National Mental Health Commission to scope the establishment
of lived experience peaks. It also enacts Action 22.4 of the Productivity Commission Inquiry
into Mental Health to fund separate peak bodies to represent the views of both consumers
and carers.
Recommendation 9
The committee recommends the Department of Health and Aged Care, in consultation with
key stakeholder groups and allied health professionals, develop a mental health support
program tailored to carers aged 25 years and under. The program should consider:
• the unique mental and physical health impacts of caring on young people;
• the intersection of mental health for young carers with their education, training and
employment opportunities and outcomes; and
• how to raise awareness in educational settings of the burdens faced by young carers and
how educators can support and direct young carers to appropriate support programs.
The Government agrees in principle to this recommendation.
The Government delivers a range of programs which support young carers and address
mental health concerns.
Through Carer Gateway, a range of services support young carers and their individual needs,
including counselling services, in person peer support groups, coaching and online skills
courses. These services aim to improve carer wellbeing and increase capacity to support
carers to participate socially and economically, as well as reinforce resilience through
preventative support services.
Carers Australia, the peak body for carers in Australia, has established the Young Carers
Network, which provides support, services and resources specifically for young carers. The
Young Carer Network also allows young carers to connect with other young carers online.
Carers Australia also delivers the Young Carer Bursary Program, which assists eligible carers
aged 25 years and younger to continue to study. On 26 April 2023, the Government
announced additional funding of $3 million a year for the Young Carer Bursary Program,
increasing the number of bursaries offered from 1,000 to around 1,600 and bursary
payments from $3,000 to $3,768 each year, in recognition of the increased cost of living and
challenges faced in balancing study and caring responsibilities.
The development of a new National Carer Strategy will explore how to better support young
carers to improve and maintain their health and wellbeing.
The Government also funds the National Workforce Centre for Child Mental Health known
as Emerging Minds. In response to an increasing number of parents, carers and families
accessing their resources and information, Emerging Minds has developed an online toolkit
44
for parents, carers and families designed for use at home and/or with the support of a GP or
other healthcare worker. The resources include coverage across a broad range of mental
health information, parenting, trauma-informed approaches to managing impacts of
COVID-19 and community trauma events, in addition to guidance on understanding
supports available from practitioners.
Supporting school-aged carers within education settings is critically important for both the
building of their resilience skills and ensuring they are able to develop, achieve an
education, and be positioned to progress their own future goals and wellbeing. The
Government funds the national Mental Health in Education initiative, known as Be You,
which provides evidence-based frameworks, professional learning, resources, and supports
to increase mental health literacy and skills in workers and educators in early learning
services and primary and secondary schools. This ensures they are able to support their
students, in particular those cohorts with additional challenges potentially impacting their
mental health and wellbeing.
Once established, the 2 independent national mental health lived experience peak bodies
will also seek to amplify the specific perspectives of mental health consumers and carers to
drive equitable reform in mental health.
The Individual Placement and Support program is delivered in 50 headspace centres and 2
Adult Mental Health centres to help people with mental illness, including young carers, find
and keep a job of their choice. The Digital Work and Study Service, provides integrated
clinical and vocational work and study service providing support to young people with
mental ill health, via a digital platform.
The Individual Placement and Support program and the Digital Work and Study Service are
currently being evaluated. Evaluation findings will inform decisions on continued service
delivery models, referral pathways, the community engagement model and inform how
these programs could be integrated into future employment program reforms.
Under the National Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Agreement, all governments
committed to undertake an analysis of unmet need for psychosocial supports outside of the
National Disability Insurance Scheme. While carers are not the main target cohort of the
unmet need analysis, it will include modelled estimates of psychosocial need among carers –
including those aged 25 years and under – of people with mental illness. The findings of the
analysis, together with the National Disability Insurance Scheme Review, will help to inform
all governments’ considerations on future psychosocial support arrangements for people
who are not supported through the National Disability Insurance Scheme.
Recommendation 10
The committee recommends the Australian Government review the accessibility,
availability, and flexibility of respite care with a view to improving respite care options
available to working carers and those they care for.
The Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
45
Government funding for respite care predominantly sits in the aged care and disability
sectors. Some state and territory government health departments also fund carer support
and respite programs.
Currently, the My Aged Care assessment teams assess My Aged Care clients and make one
or more recommendations for respite services. This may include emergency respite,
Commonwealth Home Support planned respite, in-home respite (through a Home Care
Package), Home Care Package recipients with additional Commonwealth Home Support
respite, residential respite and/or non-funded services. Subsequently, the carers and/or
respite providers can then plan and book the respite services for the carer and client.
Carer Gateway also supports carers to access appropriate respite options to support the
needs of both the carer and the care recipient. Carer Gateway facilitates the booking and
funds respite services on behalf of carers, however access to, and availability of, appropriate
respite services is the responsibility of the broader disability and aged care service systems.
The evaluation of Government carer support programs, commissioned by the Department
of Social Services, includes a review of the use of respite services by carers, as provided
under Carer Gateway.
The Government also funds a range of dementia-specific respite initiatives and programs
that support both the person living with dementia and their carer through the Improving
respite care for people living with dementia and their carers program.
In addition, the Department of Health and Aged Care is currently reviewing respite services
in the context of the broader aged care reforms, with a key focus on improving access and
reducing the stigma attached to respite services.
Recommendation 11
The committee recommends the Australian Government develop and implement programs
and initiatives for informal carers from migrant and CALD backgrounds to improve access to
carer support services and family support.
The Government agrees in principle with this recommendation.
To assist carers in self-identifying, and to promote awareness of carer supports and services
available, the Carer Gateway website has a range of information including factsheets that
are translated in 29 languages as well as translated case studies, radio clips and posters.
Carers can also access the Translating and Interpreting Service through the Carer Gateway.
Additionally, the Department of Social Services has developed a tailored Carer Gateway
stakeholder kit for culturally and linguistically diverse carers, which was provided to
culturally and linguistically diverse organisations, to help promote the Carer Gateway among
their networks.
The Department of Social Services also engaged Embrace Society, a culturally and
linguistically diverse specialist agency, as a campaign supplier to advise on and deliver
46
appropriate public relations activities for culturally and linguistically diverse audiences for
the Carer Gateway communications campaign which ceases 30 June 2024.
The new National Carer Strategy will seek to ensure First Nations carers and culturally and
linguistically diverse carers are self-identifying and how to improve engagement with these
diverse groups.
The Government also funds a range of services and programs which support people of
culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds caring for a person with dementia through
the Department of Health and Aged Care, including through counselling and carer support
groups, dementia behaviour support, dementia-specific respite programs, and dementia
education and training.
Recommendation 12
The committee recommends that the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations
develop training materials for all staff in care roles about cultural competency and safety,
discrimination and anti-racism and the delivery of trauma-informed care.
The Government agrees in part to this recommendation.
The Government has established a national network of 10 Jobs and Skills Councils to provide
industry with a stronger, more strategic voice in ensuring Australia’s vocational education
and training sector delivers stronger outcomes for learners and employers.
Jobs and Skills Councils identify skills and workforce needs for their sectors, map career
pathways across education sectors, develop contemporary vocational education and
training products, support collaboration between industry and training providers to improve
training and assessment practice and act as a source of intelligence on issues affecting their
industries. Jobs and Skills Councils may also create learning resources on behalf of their
industries, as a key part of an industry-led training system.
HumanAbility is the Jobs and Skills Council for the aged care and disability, children’s
education and care, health, human services, and sport and recreation sectors. It is
responsible for the development of nationally recognised training package qualifications
and skillsets that support workers in the care and support sector. This includes ensuring that
national training products are responsive to current and emerging skill requirements.
Training materials to support care workers are also developed by employers, peak bodies
and unions.
The Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency has also developed the National
Scheme’s Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health and Cultural Safety Strategy
2020–2025. The aim of this strategy is to make cultural safety the norm for First Nations
patients. It sets a clear direction and course of action for Australian Health Practitioner
Regulation Agency, National Boards and Accreditation Authorities, who together regulate
Australia’s 850,000 registered health practitioners.
47
The Dementia Training Program, funded through the Department of Health and Aged Care,
develops and delivers dementia training for the aged care workers and other groups, with
training including modules on culturally safe and trauma-informed care. The Department of
Health and Aged Care also funds Partners in Culturally Appropriate Care to develop and
deliver training for aged care providers to assist them in providing culturally appropriate
care.
The Equip Aged Care Learning Modules funded through the Department of Health and Aged
Care are available for aged care workers and anyone interested in aged care. The short
online modules cover a range of topics including trauma informed care and cross-cultural
awareness.
Recommendation 30
The committee recommends the Australian Government review the level of Carers Payment
and Carers Allowance, acknowledging the significant social and economic contribution that
carers make.
The committee also recommends that the Australian Government consider reversal of the
current policy which transfers sole parents from Parenting Payment Single to JobSeeker
Principal Carer payments when their youngest child turns eight years of age, and imposes
mutual obligation activities on them when their youngest child turns six years of age.
The committee further recommends the Australian Government ensure all income security
payments are regularly reviewed to ensure that they are adequate.
Australian Greens’ Additional Recommendation 10
The Australian Greens recommend that the Department of Social Services review and
increase the level of the Carers Payment and the Carers Allowance, restoring them to their
relative level of previous years, acknowledging the significant economic contribution that
carers make.
Australian Greens’ Additional Recommendation 11
The Australian Greens recommend the Australian Government ensure all income security
payments (including the Age Pension, Disability Support Pension and JobSeeker Payment)
are regularly reviewed and increased to remain above the poverty line and immediately
increase the rate of income support payments to at least $88 a day.
Australian Greens’ Additional Recommendation 12
The Australian Greens recommend the Australian Government ensure sole parents on
income support payments can access the Parenting Payment Single until their youngest child
turns sixteen years of age, and reverse the current policy which transfers sole parents from
Parenting Payment Single to JobSeeker Principal Carer, when their youngest child turns eight
years of age, and imposes mutual obligation activities on them when their youngest child
turns six years of age.
48
The Government notes this recommendation and the Australian Greens’ additional
recommendations.
The Government recognises and acknowledges the significant contribution carers make.
Carer Payment is an income support payment paid to individuals who, because of the
demands of their caring role, are unable to participate in substantial paid employment.
Carer Payment is paid at the highest legislated rate in the social security system and
provides a safety net to assist carers with the basic cost of living. It is not a wage to
compensate carers for providing care, nor is it designed to cover the full cost of caring for
someone with disability or severe medical conditions. It is indexed twice a year – in March
and September – to keep pace with changes in the cost of living.
Carer Allowance is a supplementary payment for carers who provide daily care and
attention to a person who requires substantial additional care. It can be paid in addition to
Carer Payment and can assist towards some of the costs a carer might incur.
The Government has announced a range of measures in recent Budgets to provide
additional financial assistance for income support recipients.
In the 2023–24 Budget, this included providing $1.9 billion over 5 years from 2022–23 to
extend the age of eligibility for Parenting Payment (Single) until a recipient’s youngest child
turns 14 (previously 8).
Expanding eligibility for Parenting Payment (Single) until the youngest child turns 14 ensures
that principal caregivers receive higher levels of income support until their youngest child is
old enough to require less ongoing supervision. By raising the age cut-off for the youngest
dependent child from 8 to 14 years, an extra 86,000 single parents were receiving the higher
rate of Parenting Payment (Single) as at 26 April 2024.
In the same Budget, the Government also provided $4.9 billion over 5 years from 2022–23
to increase working age and student payments by $40 per fortnight and reduce the
qualifying age to 55 years (down from 60 years) for the higher rate of JobSeeker Payment
for single recipients who have been on payment for 9 continuous months.
The Government also announced $2.7 billion over 5 years from 2022–23 to provide
additional support to renters, by increasing the maximum rates of Commonwealth Rent
Assistance by 15 per cent.
The 2023–24 Budget income support changes came into effect from 20 September 2023, at
the same time as legislated indexation of payments such as JobSeeker Payment,
Commonwealth Rent Assistance and Parenting Payment. These measures are providing
responsible and targeted assistance that is benefitting around 2 million recipients.
49
The 2024–25 Budget included an additional $2 billion over 5 years in targeted and
responsible support for income support recipients including:
• $1.9 billion to increase the maximum rates of Commonwealth Rent Assistance by a
further 10 per cent. This was the first back-to back increase in over 30 years.
• $41.2 million to expand eligibility to the higher rate of JobSeeker Payment to single
JobSeeker Payment recipients with a partial capacity to work of 0-14 hours per week,
so that those with barriers to employment who have limited or no capacity to work
due to their condition – but who do not qualify for Disability Support Pension –
receive extra support.
• $18.6 million to change the 25 hour per week rule for Carer Payment recipients to
instead allow up to 100 hours work over a 4 week period and remove the restrictions
on study, volunteering and travel for work.
• extending the two-year freeze on social security deeming rates for a further 12
months to 30 June 2025.
The Government has committed to consider the rates of income support payments at every
Budget update. The Government has also established the Economic Inclusion Advisory
Committee to provide advice ahead of every Federal Budget on economic inclusion,
including policy settings, systems and structures, and the adequacy, effectiveness and
sustainability of income support payments.
4.4 People preparing for or seeking employment
The Government recognises the value for individuals and the economy from entering or
returning to the workforce. The gendered nature of work and care arrangements impact
women’s engagement and progression in the labour force and have implications on
women’s engagement with employment services. A well-designed employment services
model plays an important role in improving outcomes of jobseekers, particularly women
who face long-term disadvantage and complex barriers to workforce participation.
The 2023 Carer Wellbeing Survey shows that the number of employed carers of typical
working age increased significantly in 2023, with 62.4 per cent of carers employed,
6.2 per cent unemployed and 31.3 per cent were not in the labour force. Of the carers that
were employed, 36.3 per cent worked less than 20 hours per week, 28.4 per cent worked
30–34 hours per week, 35.4 per cent worked 35–44 hours per week, and only 7.5 per cent
worked 45 or more hours. Some groups of carers were significantly more likely to report
that their ability to engage in paid work was getting worse. This included carers aged 55 to
74, those caring more than 40 hours per week, continuous carers, primary carers, sole
carers, those who care for someone who lives with them and carers of people with high to
very high assistance needs.
In the 2024–25 Budget, the Government announced it would introduce changes to the
participation limit for Carer Payment. Under the changes, Carer Payment recipients will be
able to work 100 hours over a four-week period rather than the 25 hour per week current
limit. This will provide greater flexibility for Carer Payment recipients to structure their work
commitments around their caring role.
50
Additionally, travel time, education and volunteering activities will no longer be counted in
the participation limit. The measure also introduces a six-month suspension period for
recipients who work over the new flexible limit, meaning if their circumstances change, they
won’t need to reapply to access the Carer Payment. Recipients will also be able to use single
Temporary Cessation of Care days to cover one-off or occasional instances of exceeding the
participation limit.
4.4.1 New voluntary pre-employment service for parents
The House of Representatives Select Committee on Workforce Australia Employment
Services was established on 2 August 2022 to inquire into matters related to Workforce
Australia Employment Services. This House Select Committee specifically considered the
role of ParentsNext in providing early intervention pre-employment services to parents and
carers of young children as part of the employment services system. Its interim report on
ParentsNext was tabled on 1 March 2023 and its report into Workforce Australia
Employment Services was tabled on 30 November 2023. This recommended large scale
reform to fundamentally rebuild the Commonwealth employment services system. The
Government is carefully considering the House Select Committee’s recommendations.
On 7 December 2023, the Government announced that it will introduce a new voluntary
pre-employment service for parents from 1 November 2024, to replace ParentsNext. The
design of the new service is informed by consultation feedback from parents and their real
life experiences and a broad range of stakeholders. Where possible, the service design also
considered Recommendation 8 of the Interim Report of the Committee on Workforce
Australia Employment Services.
The new voluntary pre-employment service will be available to parents and carers who are
facing disadvantage and who have young children under 6 years. A broader range of parents
will be eligible for the service including those in receipt of certain income support payments,
as well as some parents who do not receive a payment. The service will be flexible, will
value parents’ and carers’ roles caring for their children, and it will support them to make
their own choices about the support they need. The service will be high quality and
delivered by suitably qualified staff and staff with lived experience, who will support parents
to work towards their education and employment goals.
4.4.2 Pre-employment programs, employment services and incentives
There are also a current range of pre-employment programs, employment services and
incentives to help Australians, including those who have paid or unpaid caring
responsibilities, build their capability and find work. These services include Workforce
Australia (the mainstream employment service), Disability Employment Services (a specialist
service for people with disability, with the Government announcing that it will implement a
new specialist disability employment program in the 2024–25 Budget to replace the existing
program by 1 July 2025 to deliver high-quality personalised services) and Transition to Work
(a specialist service for disadvantaged young people). In remote Australia, the Government
has announced a new Remote Jobs and Economic Development Program as part of its
commitment to replace the Community Development Program. The Government funds
51
tailored pre-employment projects which support participants to secure entry level
employment through the Launch into Work program. The Local Jobs Program provides
resources and funding at the local level to accelerate reskilling and upskilling of job seekers
in areas that address community priorities.
The Launch into Work and Local Jobs programs enable the Government to trial project ideas
that build the skills of job seekers for employment or help businesses to fill vacancies. These
projects gather evidence on interventions that work and could be suitable for broader
application. For example, an activity undertaken under the Local Jobs Local Recovery Fund,
which included a pre-employment program tailored to working in the ECEC sector, served as
the model for the Department of Education in developing further pilots for the sector in
different locations.
In the 2024–25 Budget, as part of a Paid Employment Pathways Package, the Government
invested $54 million to trial 2 new work programs. The Real Jobs, Real Wages initiative is a
tapered wage subsidy pilot, brokered by the Australian Public Service, with a focus to
reward employers for ongoing and sustained employment outcomes. WorkFoundations will
support social enterprises and businesses who can provide tailored paid job placements for
jobseekers facing high barriers to employment.
In the October 2022–23 Budget the Government committed to a $1 billion 12-month Skills
Agreement, jointly funded with states and territories. This made available 180,000 Fee-Free
TAFE and vocational education places in 2023, prioritising access to training for unpaid
carers, people out of work or receiving income support, women facing economic insecurity,
First Nations Australians, young people (aged 17 to 24), women undertaking study in
non-traditional fields, people with disability and certain categories of visa holders.
The five-year National Skills Agreement that commenced on 1 January 2024 between the
Commonwealth and state and territory governments will deliver significant investment in a
national vocational education and training system that provides high quality, responsive and
accessible education and training to boost productivity. A key principle is to ensure no
Australians are left behind as the Australian economy transitions and adapts to structural
change, including by providing opportunities for life-long learning and foundation skills
development – particularly women, mature age Australians, those experiencing long-term
unemployment, First Nations Australians, young people, people from culturally and
linguistically diverse communities, people with disability, and regional and remote learners.
52
Recommendation 8
The committee recommends the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations and
the Department of Education develop a large-scale, evidence-based, appropriately
evaluated, holistic, non-compulsory training and work placement program, to assist informal
carers returning to or seeking further engagement with paid employment, training or
voluntary work. Recognition of the prior education, employment and experiences of
informal carers should be incorporated into the program.
The committee further recommends that the compulsory elements of ParentsNext be
abolished for people providing care.
The Government agrees in part to this recommendation.
The Government has already acted to make the ParentsNext program voluntary.
On 7 December 2023, the Government announced it will introduce a new voluntary
pre-employment service for parents of young children. Until the new service is
implemented, the Government announced that it will extend the operation of ParentsNext
as a voluntary program until 31 October 2024.
The design of the new service is informed by consultation feedback from parents and their
real-life experiences and a broad range of stakeholders. It is also informed by research and
evaluation evidence, as well as recommendations from the House Select Committee, the
Women’s Economic Equality Taskforce, the Economic Inclusion Advisory Committee, and
the Senate Select Committee on Work and Care.
The new service will be available nationally, commencing from 1 November 2024, for
eligible parents and carers of young children. This includes parents and carers who receive
an income support payment as well as some who do not.
The service will be client-centred and will focus on parents’ and carers’ strengths to support
them to set and achieve education and employment goals. Services will collaborate with
other local service providers to deliver locally engaged and place-based services. They will
be able to support parents and carers to access other local services that they want and
need.
A new Individual Fund will give parents and carers discretion, transparency and equity over
purchases related to building skills and capability. It may be used to pay course fees,
materials or equipment required for a course, including laptops for online study.
53
The Government funds Carers Queensland to deliver the Tristate Carer Vocational
Outcomes Pilot Program (publicly known as Your Caring Way), across Queensland, South
Australia and Tasmania to build carers’ capacity to participate in social, vocational and
economic opportunities. The program delivers face-to-face and online training, to help
carers who are looking for work to gain vocational education qualifications. Specifically, the
program provides end-to-end vocational coaching and support, designed to support carers
throughout the duration of the program, during placement and the transition into
employment. Funding for the program is currently due to cease in June 2025.
Findings from the evaluation of Government carer support programs (including Your Caring
Way) will inform any recommendations to the Government on the future of these
programs.
4.5 Workers
Alongside legislative reforms to the workplace relations system, the Government is also
taking steps to support eligible workers who have caring responsibilities through paid
parental leave and improved superannuation entitlements.
4.5.1 Paid parental leave
The Government has expanded and improved the Paid Parental Leave scheme to support
women’s workforce participation and help more dads and partners take time off to be with
their children.
Legislative amendments that came into effect on 1 July 2023 give more families access to
the Government payment, give parents increased flexibility in how they take the leave and
encourage parents to share care to promote gender equality.
Then, from July 2024, the Government is delivering the largest expansion to paid parental
leave since it was introduced. From 1 July 2024, 2 more weeks of payment will be added
each year until the overall length of the Paid Parental Leave scheme reaches 26 weeks by
July 2026 (up from current 20 weeks). More than 180,000 families are expected to benefit
from the expansion of the scheme each year.
The Government’s reforms will also increase the number of weeks reserved for each parent
on a ‘use it or lose it’ basis to 4 weeks in order to encourage greater sharing of care and
household responsibilities. It will also provide more flexibility by increasing the amount of
leave that parents can take at the same time, from 2 to 4 weeks.
These settings, which are based on advice from the Women’s Economic Equality Taskforce,
strike an important balance of increasing support to families, encouraging both parents to
take leave, and providing flexibility in how they structure their care arrangements.
54
The Government Paid Parental Leave scheme is paid at the rate of the national minimum
wage. The Government scheme is intended to complement employer-provided parental
leave entitlements and extend the average length of time off work taken by parents after a
birth or adoption. According to data reported by the Workplace Gender Equality Agency, in
2023, 63 per cent of employers offered some form of employer-funded paid parental leave.
4.5.2 Superannuation
The Government recognises the working-life earnings gap between men and women is the
main driver of the gender gap in superannuation balances at retirement and has committed
to reducing the superannuation gender savings gap.
The Government has announced that pending the passage of legislation, for babies born or
adopted on or after 1 July 2025, eligible parents will receive an additional 12 per cent of
paid parental leave as a contribution to their superannuation fund.
This will help to reduce the gendered gaps in superannuation balances at retirement and
signals that caring for babies is valued. It will also help normalise parental leave as a
workplace entitlement, like annual and sick leave.
Once the Paid Parental Leave scheme is fully expanded from 1 July 2026, the maximum
amount a family would receive in superannuation contributions is up to around $3,000 per
birth. Modelling suggests that a median female earner’s superannuation balance would be
around $4,250 higher at retirement.
Recommendation 16
In light of recent and forthcoming legislative amendments, the committee recommends the
Australian Government consider mechanisms to fund and implement a pathway to reach
international best practice of 52 weeks of paid parental leave. The government-funded
leave should be paid at least at the minimum full-time wage, with consideration given to
encouraging employers to top up payments to full wage replacement.
The committee also recommends the Australian Government consider further amendments
to the Paid Parental Leave Act 2010 to:
• include 'use it or lose it' provisions so that a proportion of the leave is taken by a co-
parent;
• guarantee the full period of paid leave to sole parents; and
• ensure superannuation is paid in addition to paid parental leave payments.
Interim Report Recommendation 6
The committee recommends the Australian Government amend, as soon as is practicable,
the Paid Parental Leave Act 2010 to legislate for a paid parental leave period of 26 weeks.
55
Australian Greens’ Additional Recommendation 5
The Australian Greens recommend, as a priority, that the Australian Government amend the
Paid Parental Leave Act 2010 to immediately increase government-funded paid parental
leave to 26 weeks, then by four weeks every year from 2027 to 2032, and then a final
increase of two weeks in 2033, in order to reach the international standard of 52 weeks of
paid parental leave by 2033.
Australian Greens’ Additional Recommendation 6
The Australian Greens recommend the Australian Government further amend the to the Paid
Parental Leave Act 2010 to:
• include 'use it or lose it' provisions to encourage co-parents to each take leave in
accordance with best practice, and having regard to the recommendations of the
Women's Economic Equality Taskforce;
• guarantee the full 52 weeks leave to sole parents;
• provide an additional two weeks leave, in addition to the 52 weeks, if the co-parent takes
at least the minimum use it or lose it leave entitlement;
• ensure superannuation is paid in addition to the paid parental leave payment; and
• relax work and residency tests for eligibility for paid parental leave to ensure all parents
have support to take leave. In particular, reforms should allow funded post graduate
study to be counted as work for the purposes of satisfying the work test.
The Government agrees in part to this recommendation and notes the Interim Report
recommendation and the Australian Greens’ additional recommendations.
Australia takes a hybrid approach to parental leave, where the Government payment is a
minimum entitlement designed to complement employer-provided leave. To extend the
length of time parents can take off after birth or adoption, they can receive the Government
payment before, after, or at the same time as employer-paid leave.
Under the Paid Parental Leave Amendment (More Support for Working Families) Act 2024,
the Paid Parental Leave scheme will progressively expand to 26 weeks by 2026. From 1 July
2024, 2 weeks of payment will be added each year to 2026, increasing the maximum
entitlement by 6 weeks. This amendment will also progressively increase the number of ‘use
it or lose it’ weeks reserved for each parent in a couple. From 1 July 2026, 4 weeks will be
reserved for each parent in a couple, and couples can take up to 4 weeks of payment at the
same time to encourage greater sharing of care giving responsibilities. If you are a single
parent, you can still share your days with the other parent. If you choose not to, you can get
the full number of days.
The Government has also committed to making superannuation guarantee equivalent
payments on Government-funded paid parental leave from for parents of babies born on or
after 1 July 2025.
56
Recommendation 31
The committee recommends the Australian Government amend, without delay, the
Fair Work Act 2009 to establish the right to superannuation as a National Employment
Standard.
The Government agrees to this recommendation.
The Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Protecting Worker Entitlements) Act 2023
implemented the Government’s election commitment to include a right to superannuation
in the National Employment Standards.
Recommendation 32
The committee recommends the Australian Government consider the implementation of a
care credit scheme informed by the reform options proposed in the 2013 Australian Human
Rights Commission, Investing in care: Recognising and valuing those who care report. As
part of its review the Australian Government should investigate possible mechanisms to
address the superannuation gap between men and women, including consideration of
paying care credits to superannuation for up to five years for parents who take leave and
reduce hours of employment to care for others.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government recognises that the working-life earnings gap between men and women is
the main driver of the gender gap in superannuation balances at retirement, rather than
retirement income system settings. The Government is taking action to address the earnings
gap.
The legislated increase in the Superannuation Guarantee to 12 per cent by 1 July 2025 will
ensure women have more superannuation in retirement. In addition, the Government will
make Superannuation Guarantee equivalent payments on Government-funded paid
parental leave for babies born or adopted on or after 1 July 2025. This recognises the
important contribution parents make to society, by reducing the impact career-breaks to
care for young children have on superannuation balances.
57
