Australian Government response to the
Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services
report:
Report on the 2017-2018 annual reports of bodies
established under the ASIC Act
May 2024

Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 2.1
The committee recommends that the Department of the Treasury examine whether there should
be more consistent codes of conduct for members of bodies established under the ASIC Act and,
subject to those findings, bring forward legislation to establish more consistent codes of conduct
for members of bodies established under the Australian Securities and Investments Commission
Act 2001.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation. However, given the passage of time since this
report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.
Recommendation 2.2
The committee recommends that the Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001
be amended to include a statutory requirement for the members of the Financial Reporting
Council to avoid or disclose conflicts of interest.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation. However, given the passage of time since this
report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.
Recommendation 2.3
The committee recommends that the Department of the Treasury examine whether there is any
reason why the disclosure of interest requirements for the bodies established under the
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001 should not be aligned and, subject to
those findings, bring forward legislative amendments to align the requirements and include
provisions for: avoiding conflicts of interest; declaration in writing prior to appointment of known
interests or conflicts of interest; declaration of conflicts of interest for matters being considered
at meetings and recording of those declarations in the meeting minutes; relinquishment of
involvement in any matters where conflicts of interest are present; and penalties or sanctions for
breaches.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation. However, given the passage of time since this
report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.
Response to the recommendations | 1
Recommendation 2.4
The committee recommends that the Department of the Treasury examine and publicly report on
whether the bodies established under the Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
2001 have adhered to the existing disclosure of interest requirements..
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation. However, given the passage of time since this
report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.
2 |
