Australian Government response to the
House Committee on Economics report:
Inquiry into the implications of common ownership and
capital concentration in Australia
May 2024

Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 1
This inquiry has highlighted the significant growth of the funds management sector in Australia
over the past decade, and the projected rise of large investment funds. The committee
recommends that the Australian government considers a requirement for portfolio managers
whose assets surpass a particular threshold to report their shareholdings on a quarterly or annual
basis, similar to the 13F disclosure rule introduced by the Securities and Exchange Commission in
the United States.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation. However, given the passage of time since this
report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.
Recommendation 2
Evidence gathered throughout this inquiry suggests that proxy advisors play a significant role in
shaping the voting decisions of investment funds. Proxy advisors provide institutional investment
funds with advice on how to engage with companies that they invest with, which often involves
taking positions on remuneration resolutions and matters involving environmental, social, and
governance concerns. This in and of itself would not be an issue, however, the current practices
of proxy advisory firms requires greater scrutiny. The committee recommends the Australian
government considers measures, such as the publishing of shareholder voting decisions, to
ensure asset managers do not use proxy advisors to collude in their voting decisions. Additionally,
the committee recommends the Australian government considers mechanisms to ensure asset
managers engage with their owners in making voting decisions. Further, proxy advisory firms are
currently only required to hold financial services licences for general financial product advice for
interests in managed investment schemes (excluding investor directed portfolio services) and
securities to wholesale clients. Given the full nature of the advisory work that these firms are
engaging in, the committee recommends proxy advisors be required to also hold a financial
services licence for broader services, including proxy advice, that extends beyond general financial
products.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation. However, given the passage of time since this
report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.
Response to the recommendations | 1
Recommendation 3
Common ownership has the potential to undermine competition within the Australian economy.
To prevent any such outcome, it is critical that Australia’s market regulators are proactive in
understanding the risks associated with this phenomenon. The committee recommends the
introduction of an explicit legislative requirement for the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission (ACCC) to actively monitor the extent of common ownership in Australian markets,
and that the ACCC also be empowered to take common ownership implications into account
when assessing merger applications.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation. However, given the passage of time since this
report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.
2 |
