Australian Government

Australian Government response to the
House Select Committee on Workforce Australia Employment
Services reports:

Your Future Planning

Rebuilding Employment Services

JULY 2024

IMEFODUCTION 00... eee cecccsecetereseeesseeseetesseeseseeessesesscensssssesseeessesessuseessesaessessessesseeeuseesstscussssssesscrsvarsseeeegs
Part 1: Rebuilding Employment Services Final report — recommendations 1 to 75 ............0.....
About Workforce Australia 2.2.0.0... cee sccssssssesscssesseecsscsssaesscsssssssaseesssessecssscesseseerscaaseesecsaseatareaees
Key issues raised in the report and the Australian Government’s response ................cccccccssseeceees

1. Poor service experience for many people using the SySteEM.........:.cccccccsesecccecssssesesesssseseenas

2 Overemphasis on mutual obligations and COMpHIANCE .............ccsceceesseseesscsesececsssseceeaseaetaeee

3 A lack of alignment with employer and industry n@ed5S.............:ccccssscsesscessessceececcsentatsceaces

4 Missed opportunities for place-based Servicing .............cccccescessscssesssesssssccerssssesscesssesseseeeeees

5. Substandard market design and delivery MOdES.............c:cccccssssscessecsersscessssesssceseesseseseererees

6 A lack of responsiveness, innovation and evidence-based improvement .........0..ccceseeseeee

7 Opportunities to improve transparency and accountability in the system ...........ccceceeeees

8. Supporting functions need to be iMproved ..........cccscessesseesscecsssessesssssescssesseceessseseesesereenees
Engagement and next Steps ..............cccccssssssscssccsseesssesesscsecseeesseeeessccsccsssesssseecessceesecaceesateeasessuseaeeeas
Part 2: Your Future Planning Interim report — recommendations 1 to 30.........0...:.ccccccccesscecseeceees
About ParentsNext ..........cccccccsscssecsssessssssscssesscersessesscenecssenessuecstsaeensuceecssscussssevsuseseseasenseaseenecetsaeens
Interim Report findings about ParentsNext ..............::ccccccccsscsseccessseccssssscsesscssesscseessecesersceeesatersrecss
New Voluntary Pre-Employment Service for Parent ............0..0c:ccccccscccccsscccssssecessaceentccaeecsacesacnass
Consultation to inform the design of the NEW SEPVICE ..........escssesscessessesscessessssecssscsesseeeeeseatsatseveas
Principles of the NeW Service .0.......c eee eeeeeeseeseesesesecesesscsassaceessacsuesacaeessseaseessessecatesccssesuerscesenes
Eligibility... cece essessscceseecscesesssesessssessceeseaesessaeaessesseseesssaesatsaeesessesetscesaseaseseceescceceseasenseaeaeeaes
SOrvice OFF EF oo... eeecsssscesecsesseesecseceesseseesaesessceeesseeasseesasscsseaesssceesscsesessaesessnsercateeseserssacceavauenseneas
APS Service Delivery Pilot oc. ee eeeeeeeesseeseeceseeeneesseesaeeesseeeeessueessteeeeseaeeessseatecaeecsesessesensseaens
Supports Available to Parent.......... sc cesssessescesscesesseesssesetseseessaeessssaeessseeecsseaessssesscesessesveesssevaveas
Flexible Settings .........e el ee ceeeeeceeeseeeseesseesseesnscsessaeesssesseseaeseuseseeeasseaeessesaeteceeecseccssaceeseeesvssortees

IM PlerMentation ...... ee eeceseesccsecnsecseesssesseseeseseeesseesuessesseseessaessssaesensseeesssesecsseessceusssseessassnseasaaens
Attachment A: The Eight Principles for Reform of Employment Services.............0.....ccccescseseseeeneeees

Attachment B: Terms of Reference ..............::cccccccsessesssccscsesssccesececesescacssssceececenssacceccecssecensreesessuscncasess

Introduction

This is the Australian Government’s response to the House Select Committee on Workforce
Australia Employment Services (Select Committee) interim and final reports. The interim
report on ParentsNext, Your Future Planning, was published in February 2023 and the final
report on the broader Workforce Australia employment services system, including
complementary programs, Rebuilding Employment Services, was published in November
2023.

The Select Committee was established on 2 August 2022 to undertake a first principles
review of the Workforce Australia employment services system. The Select Committee had
broad-ranging terms of reference, which were expanded to include pre-employment and
complementary programs on 16 September 2022.

The Select Committee received extensive evidence during its inquiry on Workforce Australia
with 14 public hearings held throughout 2022 and 2023, and 321 submissions and

59 supplementary submissions received. This evidence was supplemented by private
briefings with stakeholders, 51 meetings and site visits across all Australian jurisdictions
including metropolitan and regional areas, and direct engagement with OECD experts and
representatives from over 10 other nations.

The Employment White Paper — Working Future: The Australian Government’s White Paper
on Jobs and Opportunities — sets out the Government’s vision for a dynamic and inclusive
labour market where workers, businesses and communities have the opportunity to thrive.

Working for Women: A Strategy for Gender Equality (Working for Women) outlines the
Government’s vision for gender equality — an Australia where people are safe, treated with
respect, have choices, and have access to resources and equal outcomes no matter their
gender.

The employment services delivered by the Government play a crucial role in achieving these
objectives.

A quality employment services system can deliver social and economic benefits by
supporting more efficient, inclusive labour markets. An effective employment services
system strengthens growth and productivity through lifting participation, skills, and
facilitating bringing employers and those who want to work closer together. It can smooth
the effects of labour market disruptions, such as industry change and retrenchment, and
provide supported pathways to employment for people facing barriers to work, earning and
social participation. By facilitating links to education and training and other supports,
effective employment services can help prevent the negative effects of long-term
unemployment which can result in entrenched disadvantage. For employers, a quality
employment services system can connect them with a diverse range of people seeking work
and build their capacity to access a range of supports to improve recruitment and retention.

3

The Select Committee has reported their view that Workforce Australia employment
services do not meet the needs of all people and employers who use it, and that we need
to do better.

The Government has considered the views of the Select Committee and agrees that reform
is necessary. The Government will create a responsive employment services system so that
it actively supports meaningful participation and secure and sustainable employment of
people, and the workforce needs of employers and industry, based on the principles set out
in the Employment White Paper. This includes building and embedding more active
stewardship from the Australian Public Service (APS) in the employment services system,
combined with a range of providers and delivery partners, including a greater role for
community-based organisations such as social enterprise and Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander community-controlled organisations.

The Government recognises people must be at the centre of policy development and service
delivery and that our reforms are coordinated. Our approach to design and deliver
employment services reform through engagement with people, community and businesses
is outlined below. We are committed to working closely with participants, stakeholders and
the broader community to strengthen employment services and provide a service that
meets the needs of Australians.

Reform to employment services is important and will take time to get right. The Select
Committee itself acknowledged it will take time for a new system to be designed and
implemented in full. The Government will release further detail on employment services
reforms, including the phasing and priority for implementation. This further detail will be
informed by the initial views received through engagement with people, community and
businesses, and will continue to draw on insights from the Inquiry.

We thank the Select Committee for its work and the many people who took the time to
provide submissions and appear as witnesses.

This response has 2 parts. Part 1 responds to the Rebuilding Employment Services final
report and:

e summarises the Select Committee’s 75 recommendations into 8 key issues

e lists the Select Committee’s recommendations relevant to each key issue

e indicates the Government’s policy directions for employment services reform, and

e lists the immediate changes to deal with pressing issues in employment services
announced in the 2024-25 Budget.

*Where this Government response refers to people using the system, or participants, it means
people who are participating in Workforce Australia and related programs.

Part 2, which responds to the Your Future Planning interim report, includes an overview of
the new voluntary pre-employment service for parents, to replace the ParentsNext program
from 1 November 2024.

Part 1: Rebuilding Employment Services Final report —
recommendations 1 to 75

About Workforce Australia

Workforce Australia is the Australian Government’s largest employment service and
operates across all non-remote areas in Australia. It is comprised of Workforce Australia
Online, Workforce Australia Services, Transition to Work, plus a range of additional supports
through complementary programs. Workforce Australia’s total caseload size is 664,236 (as
at 31 March 2024). The vision for Workforce Australia is to provide a simple, supported,
connected and respectful service that:

e helps eligible people find employment through online or provider-led services

e supports businesses with recruitment and to adjust workplace practices to help
connect them to candidates with the skills they need, and

e focuses providers on people who need more support.

The 2 other main employment services programs are Disability Employment Services and
the Community Development Program. The Disability Employment Services caseload is
251,597 (as at 31 March 2024) and the Community Development Program’s caseload is
40,716 (as at 31 March 2024). There are parallel reforms underway in both programs. The
Government announced reforms to remote employment services in February 2024,
including a new Remote Jobs and Economic Development program. As part of the 2024-25
Budget, the Government announced reforms to Disability Employment Services, with a new
specialist disability employment program commencing on 1 July 2025.

Key issues raised in the report and the Australian Government’s
response

The Select Committee recommendations call for large scale reform to fundamentally rebuild
the Australian Government’s employment services system. At the thematic level, the Select
Committee has raised the following eight key issues with the current employment services
system in its Rebuilding Employment Services report.

Recommendations 1, 2 and 75 of the Rebuilding Employment Services report are being
considered as part of the Government’s overall approach to reform of employment services,
while the remainder have been listed under the key issues outlined below. Many of the
recommendations apply across multiple key issues, however for simplicity, each
recommendation is only listed once under the most relevant key issue.

1. Poor service experience for many people using the system
Relevant recommendations 8, 9, 10, 11, 13, 14, 18, 28, 29, 30, 32, 33, 35, 40, 41, 43

The Select Committee found too many people experience the current system as overly
complex and rigid, with a ‘one size fits all’ approach that does not address or respect
individual circumstances. Put simply, the Select Committee found the current system works
for some but not for all, with too many people staying in the system for too long.

The Select Committee found the current system is too often experienced as punitive, with
people not receiving adequate support which reflects their circumstances, leading to
disengagement and poor outcomes. The Select Committee also heard some of the current
training, mentoring and work experience activities do not offer meaningful support for
employment, and therefore do not adequately prepare some people for employment
success. The Select Committee was particularly concerned about those participants who
remain in the system long term.

The Select Committee identified the need for better upfront assessment processes. It was
found that in some circumstances, the current assessment processes do not adequately
identify the personal circumstances that impact on a person’s connection to the labour
market and then link this to appropriate service offerings. This includes ensuring those at
greater risk of long-term unemployment are identified early and referred to the right
supports for their needs. There are also issues with delays for some assessment processes.

The Government agrees that people who use employment services deserve a quality service
experience that is easy to engage with and tailored to their needs. Employment will remain
a primary goal, with the service culture focused on identifying and responding to each
person’s capacity and goals. To support the vision for full and inclusive employment, the
Government will consider appropriate servicing options that are better aligned to the needs
and circumstances of people using employment services to build their capabilities, where
needed, support their wellbeing and lead to sustainable employment. Appropriately
targeted servicing options will require employment services to be delivered in a range of
ways, supported by data and evidence, such as tailored online and in-person servicing.

The Government notes that most people are participating in employment services as a
result of receiving an income support payment. The Government is committed to ensuring
the social security system continues to be considered to facilitate participation.

As part of the reform process, the Government will seek to better understand and respond
to the needs of people within the system. The employment services system has a broad
range of participants with diverse servicing needs. The Government recognises that many
people are job-ready and capable of self-managing with modest additional support.
Improved assessment processes could provide a mechanism for better understanding of
people’s circumstances, enabling referral to the most appropriate support. This includes

early intervention to reduce the risk of remaining in the system long term. Where
participants do churn in and out of the system repeatedly or remain in services long term
without a connection to the labour market, we will ensure our service offer understands
and addresses these circumstances with appropriate support. The goal is to ensure each
person is suitably assessed and referred to the most appropriate service to best meet their
needs when they need it, with appropriate safeguards when circumstances change. We will
also consider ways to address delayed assessments.

To address complexity and fragmentation, the Government will consider options to improve
coherence and align service offers across the entire employment services system. This
includes considering how to improve linkages with the broader human services and the
skills, training and education systems. There are opportunities to achieve better economic
and social outcomes with greater wrap-around support and a more user-friendly ecosystem.

As a first step, the Government has acted to implement rapid operational improvements to
the service offer for those in digital and provider services. For example, the Government is
improving the quality of information provided to people, communication tone, and system
accessibility, further facilitated via enhanced participant engagement. A specific example of
this is the Points Based Activation System (PBAS). PBAS products have been redesigned with
a First Nations communications specialist and user tested to ensure they are culturally
suitable and easy to understand.

The Government will seek advice on options to ensure a high-quality service delivery
experience. These options will be developed through engagement with key stakeholders.

2. Overemphasis on mutual obligations and compliance
Relevant recommendations 34, 48, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64

The Select Committee found current settings in the employment services system place an
overemphasis on mutual obligations and compliance. This creates situations where some
people experience mutual obligations that are inappropriate for their circumstances and a
disproportionate response to non-compliance, resulting in unnecessary stress and
administration for those impacted. The Select Committee also observed that mutual
obligation requirements are often seen as too onerous and unsuitable for supporting
engagement with employment services. It noted that the mutual obligations framework is
fragmented, treating people differently when they move between services, such as between
Workforce Australia, disability and remote employment services. The Select Committee also
found inappropriate mutual obligations can adversely affect providers, such as by increasing
the time spent administering complex compliance, and reducing their capacity to build trust
with their participants.

The Government appreciates there are longstanding community expectations that people
receiving income support, who are assessed as capable to work, engage in some kind of

activity in return. There is a role for well-designed mutual obligations that support people
into work.

The Government is mindful of the impact of inappropriate mutual obligations and has taken
several important initial steps to address more urgent concerns raised through the Select
Committee, such as strengthening the integrity of employment services and better
recognising individuals’ circumstances with mutual obligations, in the 2024-25 Budget
context. These measures will introduce further safeguards for participants; introduce an
independent participant complaints mechanism; improve the tailoring of requirements; and
reduce administrative burden to allow for more meaningful interactions with employment
services,

The Employment White Paper outlines that the type of requirements matter. Further
changes to mutual obligations will be considered as part of reforms to employment services.
The Government will progressively reform the mutual obligation framework which focuses
on supporting people into work, drawing on insights from the Inquiry. This approach will aim
to better align with the lived realities of people who use employment services, encourage
meaningful participation and foster positive labour market outcomes.

Mutual obligation requirements vary across the broader employment services system. The
Government recognises this can create inconsistent and confusing requirements for people
who move between employment services. With reforms to remote and disability
employment services underway, the Government will develop a mutual obligation and
compliance framework which balances individual needs and circumstances with the broader
aim across the employment services system. While coherence will be sought across the
system, this framework would aim to ensure mutual obligation requirements better reflect
individual circumstances, and local labour market conditions, and do not result in
inappropriate, ‘one size fits all’ arrangements.

3. A lack of alignment with employer and industry needs
Relevant recommendations 7, 12, 42, 45, 52, 53, 54, 55

The Select Committee found the current system settings disproportionately focus on labour
market supply rather than matching demand. It found the needs of, and connection with,
employers has been frequently overlooked, with the current system too focused on moving
people into jobs without sufficient regard for job suitability, employers’ needs, and helping
employers to get people into work. The Select Committee also observed the importance of
building the capacity of employers to hire people and give them appropriate opportunities
for secure work and career progression.

The Government agrees that employment services need to work better with employers and
industry in order to be effective and successful. Effective employment services create
improved job placements for people when they are complemented by support for

employers and businesses. This includes developing relationships with employers to
understand their business needs, the requirements of the role, and how people could
prepare for work in their organisation. This also includes empowering employers to consider
their approach to workforce planning, job design, recruitment, and training to create more
opportunities for participants. This in turn can lead to the delivery of more effective pre-
employment support, training and post-placement support, and employer support through
assistance with job design or recruitment processes, on-the-job mentoring, and incentives
such as wage subsidies.

Work is underway to develop an employment services system that employers want to use.
The Government has announced in the 2024-25 Budget a new paid employment pathways
package to assist people seeking work and businesses. The package contains 2 elements to
commence in July 2025:

e Real Jobs, Real Wages provides tapered wage payment to employers to fund real
wages for job placements for people with more barriers to work.

e WorkFoundations provides paid employment pathways through social enterprise
and business partnerships to assist those who have significant or complex barriers.

These will be designed with employers and provide greater support for business and social
enterprises to give more people the opportunity to gain valuable experience and contribute
to the organisation’s workforce and its future.

While these early actions will be beneficial, more work is needed to ensure quality
partnerships with employers. This includes considering improvements to the employer
engagement experience for individual businesses, fostering better linkages to skills and
training, and working with employers in relation to job design and recruitment practices. As
part of this, the Government will engage and work with industry and employers to explore
different approaches, drawing on insights from the Inquiry.

4. Missed opportunities for place-based servicing

Relevant recommendations 4, 6, 31, 49, 51, 73, 74

The Select Committee found the current employment services system has limited flexibility
in delivery and does not sufficiently recognise and adapt to suit regional and local labour
markets. The Select Committee, in setting out its views on a rebuilt system, suggests
coordination and collaboration can be improved across and between levels of governments,
programs and service delivery partners.

The Select Committee emphasised the value of place-based approaches in achieving a
greater ability to respond to regional-specific challenges, the capacity for communities and
government to shape initiatives together, and to work in long term partnerships to resolve
problems. The Select Committee also listed ongoing issues with provider collaboration.

10

The Select Committee advocated for a rich and diverse eco-system of employment services
that includes place-based approaches. It further recommended that place-based
approaches be considered to support particular cohorts facing disadvantage.

The Government acknowledges these issues and agrees that place-based approaches are an
effective tool in understanding and addressing specific and discrete labour market needs
within regions across Australia. They can and do support provider engagement and
coordination within a community. Place-based approaches can complement national
programs and act as powerful catalysts for improved community outcomes, including, but
not limited to, employment.

The Government is continuing to build and support connections across local communities
and regional areas. To achieve this, the Government will look to leverage local social capital,
relationships with employers, foundation education and skills providers, and other human
services such as housing and homelessness and mental health. The Government will
consider further investments in regional and place-based employment services to better
connect people with local labour markets, and to better meet the specific needs of people
and businesses of a region.

The Government has begun testing different approaches to augment the evidence base for
a reformed system. This includes trialling new and innovative approaches to place-based
servicing. The evidence from these trials will ensure that future reform will deliver services
that are right for communities and directly addresses the local drivers of disadvantage to
help achieve inclusive full employment.

An example of this is Broome Employment Services. Broome Employment Services has been
designed to better suit the unique local context and needs of people in Broome who use
employment services. The service commenced in November 2023 and is funded for four
years. The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations will consult with
stakeholders in Broome to ensure the service meets their needs and expectations to achieve
strong outcomes and this will inform future program design.

Another example is from the recent reforms to the Local Jobs Program. The Local Jobs
Program is the Government’s collaborative place-based initiative to ensure local labour
markets work well for all Australians, in partnership with business, communities, different
levels of government and other stakeholders. It enables engagement and intelligence
gathering at a local level and supports the delivery of bespoke tailored and responsive
activities that address local labour market priorities, as well as testing and trialling different
approaches.

Recent reforms to the Local Jobs Program include trialling APS delivery in a small number of
regions, expanded eligibility to participate in local projects to include people who are not
receiving income support and enhanced local and regional data for improved decision

11

making. The results from these changes will provide evidence to support future service
design including considering APS stewardship and delivery within programs. It will be
important to continue to build on lessons learned from work on place-based initiatives to
help build the capabilities, strengths and resilience of communities and their labour
markets.

In addition to these reforms, the Government is seeking to enable broader best practice in
place-based coordination and help ensure services are designed to respond to local
community needs and priorities. This includes implementation of the Targeting Entrenched
Disadvantage package announced in the 2023-24 Budget, which is laying the foundations for
community-led change to address entrenched disadvantage.

5. Substandard market design and delivery modes
Relevant recommendations 15, 46, 47, 50, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70, 71

The Select Committee examined the operational structure of the employment services
system, including who delivers the service and how they are paid for the delivery of services.
The Select Committee concluded the current design is flawed, with a lack of APS
stewardship and experience in the day-to-day running of employment services, contracting
regions not reflecting natural labour markets, procurement processes creating entry
barriers, too much emphasis on competition and a funding model which has not been
effective in driving down long-term unemployment. The Select Committee also identified
that excessive competition between providers is creating fragmentation in individual
regional markets that negatively impact the experience of participants and employers
engaging with the system.

The Government recognises that changes to the operational structure and the way that
services are commissioned are required to ensure effective employment services, for those
who use them both now and into the future. While there will continue to be a significant
role for traditional, provider-delivered services, the Government recognises the need for a
diverse range of players delivering employment services and providing complementary
services, along with a need to review the size and number of employment regions to ensure
they reflect local community and labour market needs. This includes exploring
strengthening the role of community-based organisations, such as social enterprises, and
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community-controlled organisations.

The Government is committed to building better collaboration with stakeholders and
partnerships to address persistent labour market disadvantage. The Government
understands support is required to ensure the significant opportunity the social enterprise
sector represents can be leveraged to deliver on employment outcomes. The $11.6 million
Social Enterprise Development Initiative announced in the 2023-24 Budget makes an initial
start on building the capability and capacity of the social enterprise market and the

$100 million Outcomes Fund will support sector growth. The WorkFoundations program,

12

announced in the 2024-25 Budget, will provide social enterprises and other businesses grant
funding to support those most disadvantaged into work. The Government will consider
appropriate mechanisms, such as certification and capability building, to support diversity in
direct and complementary service delivery.

In line with the Employment White Paper and the Select Committee’s recommendations,
the Government envisions the APS having more active stewardship of the system. In some
instances, this may include delivery of services where it can have the most meaningful
impact. To build the evidence base around APS delivery of employment services, the
Government has begun testing different approaches to better understand benefits and
issues, as well as the underpinning skills and capabilities required for APS delivery in some
circumstances. These include APS supported service delivery in Broome and the insourcing
of Employment Facilitators in specific regions under the Local Jobs program. Further, the
new voluntary pre-employment service for parents includes funding for an APS delivered
pilot in the Playford Local Government Area of South Australia, while Government will also
insource a small scale, tapered wage subsidy pilot with a focus to reward employers for
ongoing and secure employment outcomes. These trials will inform the approach to any
future direct APS delivery.

Delivery of employment services should be informed by clearly identifying what the best
support is to respond to the needs and circumstances of participants and then determining
who is best placed to deliver this support, whether it be the public, private or community
sector or through partnership arrangements. The Government will consider options for
commissioning of services which support new delivery methods and partners.

The Government is committed to ensuring that the payment model is appropriate for the
diverse needs of the caseload and incentivises the right support for all eligible people. This
will include exploring more diverse options for payments to improve the quality of servicing,
to incentivise the right behaviour, and to ensure no one is left behind.

6. A lack of responsiveness, innovation and evidence-based improvements

Relevant recommendations 24, 25, 27, 38

The Select Committee found achieving the objectives proposed for employment services
and improving the quality of services is reliant upon supporting a culture of continuous
improvement, enabling innovation, and greater focus on ongoing research and evaluation.
The Select Committee found the current employment services system:

e responds slowly to feedback from users and external stakeholders

e does not systematically link evaluation, trial and data insights to continuous
improvement

e lacks the flexibility to support some people and employers as labour market
circumstances change, both at the system level and to local conditions.

13

The Government is committed to designing a dynamic employment services system which is
capable of supporting people seeking jobs and businesses finding workers as labour market
conditions and community needs evolve over time. This will require employment services to
be designed, commissioned, administered and delivered in a way which embraces
innovation, meets communities’ evolving needs, and responds to changes in labour market
demand at the local, regional and national level.

The 2024-25 Budget included investment in a new Disability Employment Centre of
Excellence, which will play a key role in driving innovation and improving quality service
delivery for people with disability for all Government employment services. It will do this by
establishing an evidence-informed, best-practice hub that will provide resources, tools and
training to help providers deliver quality employment services and supports to both
participants with disability and employers.

The Government recognises the importance of early and strong feedback loops in ensuring
employment services remain responsive. While there are some existing feedback loops,
there is an opportunity to improve how feedback is sought, received and addressed. The
Government will ensure people who use employment services have a voice in guiding the
design and operation of the new system, and create better avenues for engagement with
users, communities, employers, and other stakeholders including peak employment and
community representatives.

7. Opportunities to improve transparency and accountability in the system
Relevant recommendations 21, 22, 23, 26, 44, 72

The Select Committee found that the employment services system lacks sufficient
transparency and accountability, adversely affecting employment outcomes and diminishing
people's trust in the system. The Select Committee also found the current system perversely
incentivises contracted providers to put profit ahead of helping people, allows inappropriate
own or related entity referrals, and does not provide adequate access to appeals and
complaints processes.

The Government agrees stronger integrity of employment services is essential and is
committed to ensuring the system is underpinned by trust and integrity.

As a first step, the Government has developed a package of initial measures to strengthen
the integrity of employment services and provide additional safeguards against
inappropriate mutual obligations and compliance action while consultation is undertaken on
broader reforms (referenced above under key issue 2: Overemphasis on mutual obligation
and compliance). This package will introduce an independent participants’ complaints
mechanism to give people a voice and access to robust resolution processes when servicing
standards are below acceptable levels, and will ensure that the application of financial
penalties are always properly and carefully determined within Services Australia noting the

14

consequences of these penalties for participants. They will allow people further time to
familiarise themselves with the employment services system and engage with their
requirements before compliance action applies. These measures will shift the focus of
providers from administrative reporting of compliance to one of relationship building and
ameliorate some of the power imbalance that is felt by participants while improving
transparency in the system.

The Government is also developing a new way of managing the performance of providers.
We will focus on providing a simpler, more accountable framework that ensures providers
deliver high-quality services for participants. This will include considering how to incentivise
and enable providers to focus on building positive relationships with both participants and
other stakeholders, while supporting performance improvements.

The Government will explore regulatory and non-regulatory options to address the issues
identified by the Select Committee. For example, clear rules could be developed to prohibit
inappropriate own-entity referrals from contracted providers and ensuring that payment
settings do not overemphasise financial incentives such as outcome payments at the
expense of the provision of quality services.

8. Supporting functions need to be improved
Relevant recommendations 3, 5, 16, 17, 19, 20, 36, 37, 39

The Select Committee found several key supporting functions for employment services need
to be improved. Supporting functions enable the efficient and effective delivery of
high-quality employment services. These include information technology (IT), legislation and
regulation, procurement practices and people.

The Government is committed to ensuring that support services, such as contact centres
administered by the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations, are
appropriately resourced to ensure people receive timely support, have the appropriate
mechanisms to be contactable and responsive to the needs of participants, and do not
experience longer call wait times. The Government acknowledges the real impact of
inefficient IT systems on people and providers. Improvements to the IT system will also
enable providers to focus more on assisting people, rather than completing administrative
tasks, and ensuring online users can more effectively self-manage their employment

journey.

As a first step, the Government has committed $9.6 million over four years to 2027-28
under the Employment Services Reform — Strengthening IT Foundations and Reducing the
Administrative Burden to begin addressing some of the issues impacting IT functionality and
$1.3 million in 2024-25 to the Australian Taxation Office to support a Single Touch Payroll
pilot.

15

Further work is being undertaken in collaboration with the Department of Social Services,
Services Australia and the National Indigenous Australians Agency on options for programs
based in legacy IT systems to be uplifted to more modern platforms to support a better
experience for users. The Government will also investigate opportunities to support better
access to data across government, where appropriate and in accordance with privacy
frameworks. The Government has committed IT funds across a number of other Workforce
Australia related budget measures to support IT capability to deliver the Government’s
priorities that will directly benefit users and improve confidence in the system.

The Government recognises that most employment services are delivered by frontline staff.
Ensuring these staff have the necessary skills to respond to the individual circumstances and
needs of people and employers is critical to realising a quality employment service
experience. The Government will explore options to ensure frontline staff have these skills.

Data and evaluation processes have a critical role in supporting continuous improvement.
The Government regularly publishes data related to the delivery of employment services on
relevant agency websites. Further work will be undertaken to strengthen the approach to
sharing data and conducting more robust evaluations that are capable of informing changes
to the design and delivery of the system. For example, the Government is funding trials to
test different settings in digital services to provide robust evidence on whether alternative
arrangements could better support some people.

Engagement and next steps

The Government is committed to developing a responsive employment services system
which actively supports meaningful participation and the secure and sustainable
employment of people, and the workforce needs of all employers.

Reforming a system as complex as employment services will take time. This response
indicates the Government’s policy directions for reforming employment services and some
of the steps already taken to address pressing issues.

The Government will establish engagement mechanisms to ensure there is a user voice in
employment services, and change the way participants, employers, providers, employment
and peak body representatives, academics and policy experts, community organisations and
advocates, and other stakeholders shape the design and delivery of the Government’s major
reforms. This will build on the extensive evidence and testimony received by the Select
Committee.

Further detail will be released on the plan for employment services reforms, including the
phasing and priority for implementation.

16

Part 2: Your Future Planning \|nterim report — recommendations 1
to 30

About ParentsNext

ParentsNext is a pre-employment program that assists parents to plan and prepare for work
before their youngest child starts school.

There were 40,380 active ParentsNext participants as at 29 February 2024. The majority
were women (96 per cent) and 77 per cent were single parents. Some of the key participant
demographic groups include parents from a culturally and linguistically diverse background
(21 per cent), First Nations parents (20 per cent), parents under the age of 25 years (15 per
cent), and parents with disability (14 per cent). Most participants were aged 25-39 years old
(70 per cent) and many ParentsNext participants have lower levels of educational
attainment with 39 per cent not having completed Year 12.

Interim Report findings about ParentsNext

While acknowledging the benefits of ParentsNext, the Select Committee’s’ Your Future
Planning report raised concerns about the program, particularly the implications of
compulsory participation requirements and payment suspensions on parents and their
children.

The key recommendation of the Select Committee was to abolish ParentsNext and replace it
with a new voluntary pre-employment service. The Select Committee also recommended
making changes to ParentsNext while the new service is being designed. To give effect to
this recommendation, on 5 May 2023 the Australian Government announced that all
compulsory participation requirements for ParentsNext would immediately be paused. The
Select Committee made recommendations relating to the design of the new service. These
recommendations include removing reporting requirements, making greater use of support
and incentives to encourage voluntary participation, and not applying the Targeted
Compliance Framework. The Select Committee recommended that the new pre-vocational
service be developed through a co-design process.

The Select Committee found there is still a need for a pre-employment service offering to
support vulnerable parents. The Government agrees there is a continued need to support
parents and has developed a new voluntary pre-employment service.

New Voluntary Pre-Employment Service for Parents

On 7 December 2023, the Government announced the new voluntary pre-employment
service for parents.

Consultation to inform the design of the new service

The new service was designed in consultation with a range of stakeholders including:

17

® parents receiving Parenting Payment

e past and present ParentsNext participants

¢ organisations and businesses that provide services to parents and young children
@ community organisations

e employers

e academics

e the Women’s Economic Equality Taskforce.

The consultations ran from early July to end September 2023 and included:

e workshops, attended by over 280 parents from diverse backgrounds and locations

e virtual one-on-one consultations, via Services Australia and a contracted
organisation

e 56 formal submissions from stakeholders, including providers. Where the
Department of Employment and Workplace Relations has received permission to do
so, the submissions have been published on the department’s website (41
submissions)

e roundtables and workshops, with over 40 community organisations, peak bodies and
other interested stakeholders

e responses from over 2,000 ParentsNext participants to an online survey, and

e feedback from parents on what we heard from them on the new voluntary service.

The consultation process was an opportunity to better understand the needs of parents and
how a new service could support them to plan for their future education and employment
goals, build their capabilities and skills, and work toward the type of paid work they want,
when they are ready. In summary, the views expressed by parents during consultations
included:

e The consultations confirmed the priority for parents is raising their children. Parents
aspire to pursue education and employment goals when they are ready and able.

e Parents spoke of the complex and varied challenges they need to navigate before
they can focus on education and employment goals.

e Parents said the new voluntary service should be accessible to all parents who need
help to plan for their future education and employment goals. It should prioritise
parents who have higher needs for support.

e Most parents did not express a strong preference for who should deliver the service.
What mattered most to parents was that the staff who deliver the service are
respectful, qualified, empathetic, and have lived experience to help parents connect
with the supports they need to reach their goals.

e Parents want to be able to make informed choices and need to know what they are
committing to. They want to know what the service offers, how it’s offered, what it
requires of them and how it will help them.

18

e Parents told us the service should use a mix of delivery methods (face to face, online,
outreach).

e Parents commonly suggested that financial and other supports would help them to
engage in the new voluntary service, for example to assist them with costs of
attending appointments, or with study fees.

e Parents want the service, especially in-person services, to consider location-based
challenges.

Principles of the New Service

Key themes from Select Committee’s report and the consultation process formed the
principles of the new service. The new service will:

e value unpaid care (caring for and raising children) as legitimate important work

e be focused on the person and provide a personalised service based on each
participant's own goals, aspirations and circumstances

e focus on participants’ strength and building confidence

e be flexible to allow parents to engage with the service when they choose to and for
as long as they wish (or until their youngest child turns 6)

e focus on job quality and security, as well as intersections between employment and
social security, where a participant has employment as a goal.

Eligibility
The new service will be targeted to providing support to parents of young children under

6 years, in non-remote areas of Australia, who are not currently in paid employment and
who are:

e in receipt of Parenting Payment Single or Partnered, Carer Payment, or Special
Benefit; or

@ are under 22 years of age; or

e not receiving one of the listed income support payments and are early school leavers
or are First Nations parents.

This reflects recommendations made by the Select Committee to broaden eligibility criteria
to a wider range of parents who would benefit from a pre-employment program.

Service Offer

The new service will provide practical assistance to parents to help them achieve their goals.
The features of the service respond directly to the recommendations of the Select
Committee and feedback gathered from parents and stakeholders. The features include:

e voluntary participation
e a flexible service that values parents’ caring role

19

e support by suitably qualified mentors with lived experience

e meeting parents where they are at — both in location and in their lives
e clear information and choice about which supports are available

e support for parents to make their own choices in deciding their future
e practical financial support to parents.

The support provided to parents addresses the recommendations of the Select Committee
by assisting parents to progress towards their employment and study goals and access
supports to care for themselves and their family. It reflects a commitment to holistic
servicing which evidence suggests is an important element of an effective pre-employment
service.

APS Service Delivery Pilot

An APS service delivery pilot will be part of the new service in one selected location. This will
provide a channel for direct feedback, and the ability to trial new approaches. It will also
build APS capacity, stewardship, and leadership.

Supports Available to Parents

The service will provide improved financial support through 2 funds to support parents’
participation in pre-employment activities. They are:

e the Individual Fund assigned to the parent, to assist them to engage in the new
service and build their capability, and

e the Pooled Fund, which will provide financial assistance for pre-employment
supports and will be administered by service providers in consultation with parents.

The funds, and in particular the Individual Fund, responds to the Select Committee’s
recommendation about parents having more transparency, discretion and equity on
accessing additional financial supports.

Flexible Settings

During the consultation, parents and stakeholders told the department that the new service
must allow them to engage when the time is right for them and their children. As a
voluntary service, parents will be able to opt in and out, or to pause participation to suit
unpredictable family life. Parents will also have the flexibility to engage with the service
when they choose and for as long as they wish, up until their youngest child turns 6 years
old.

Implementation

In line with the Select Committee’s recommendation for families facing the greatest risk of
disadvantage, ParentsNext contracts have been extended by 4 months (from 1 July 2024 to

20

the end of October 2024) until the new service launches on 1 November 2024, to ensure
continuity in service provision.

The tender process for organisations interested in delivering an effective, efficient and
culturally responsive pre-employment service has commenced. The Request for Tender
opened on 4 April 2024 and closed on 30 April 2024, with notification of outcomes
anticipated from September to October 2024.

21

Attachment A: The Eight Principles for Reform of Employment

Services
The Employment White Paper, released on 25 September 2023, sets out eight principles to

guide the Australian Government's approach to reforming employment services:

1.

Services are viewed as an investment that unlock individual potential, address employer

needs and work with industry to bolster growth.

a. the system builds human capital and ensures job placements are appropriate

b. services help businesses and communities to grow by connecting people to jobs.

There is strong Australian Public Service stewardship in the system and the outcomes it

delivers to ensure that individuals are not left behind.

Services protect the dignity and respect rights of individuals.

a. services help individuals meet their employment and personal development goals

b. services are designed and delivered in a culturally responsive and inclusive way that
meets communities’ needs.

Services provide a pathway towards decent jobs that provide the flexibility and security

that individuals need.

a. the Government may need to promote the creation of jobs to alleviate entrenched
community disadvantage where labour markets are very thin and where individuals
face very high barriers to work.

Employers use employment services to help meet their workforce needs, and can access

guidance on innovative job design, recruitment practices and inclusive approaches to

workforce development.

Employment services are designed through collaboration with individuals, employers,

and the community.

a. the participation of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Community Controlled
Organisations, and community-based organisations, is boosted in the delivery of:
employment services.

Services help people at the earliest opportunity, informed by fit-for-purpose assessment

processes.

Reforms are grounded in evidence, high quality evaluation and continuous learning and

improvement.

22

Attachment B: Terms of Reference
The House of Representatives (2 August 2022) resolved that a Select Committee on

Workforce Australia Employment Services be appointed to inquiry into and report on:

(a) the implementation, performance and appropriateness of Workforce Australia
Employment Services;

(b) the extent to which Workforce Australia Employment Services delivers services in a
way that is fair, leaves no one behind, respects individuals’ diverse needs, and
supports job seekers into secure work, in particular, its support for long term
unemployed and young people; and

(c) other matters in relation to Workforce Australia Employment Services.

On 20 September 2022, the Committee resolved to:

(a) include relevant pre-employment and complementary programs within the scope of
the Inquiry into Workforce Australia Employment Services;

(b) specifically consider the role of ParentsNext in providing early intervention services
to disadvantaged parents as part of the employment services system; and

(c) make any recommendations on ParentsNext before the end of February 2023.

23
