Australian Government response to the Education and
Employment Legislation Committee report:
Fair Work Amendment Bill 2024
JULY 2024
Page 1 of 4
Overview
The Australian Government introduced the Fair Work Amendment Bill 2024 (the Bill) to the
Parliament on 15 February 2024. The Bill will amend section 675 of the Fair Work Act 2009
(the Act) to ensure that a person does not commit an offence if that person contravenes a
Fair Work Commission order made under the right to disconnect provisions introduced to
the Act by the Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes No. 2) Act 2024.
The Bill will amend the Act to exempt contraventions of Fair Work Commission orders about
the right to disconnect from being an offence under subsection 675(1) of the Act. The
amendment in the Bill will commence at the same time as the right to disconnect provisions
in the Act, being 26 August 2024. The right to disconnect provisions will commence for small
business employers and their employees after a further 12 months, being 26 August 2025.
The Bill passed both Houses on 16 May 2024 and received the Royal Assent on 31 May 2024.
Page 2 of 4
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the Senate pass the bill.
The Government notes this recommendation.
Coalition Senators additional comments
Recommendation 1
Coalition Senators will support the removal of potential criminal penalties for employers
who contact their employees outside of work hours.
The Government notes this recommendation.
Recommendation 2
Coalition Senators recommend repealing the 'right to disconnect' provisions which
recently passed the Parliament, which were not subject to any scrutiny, will create
significant confusion and uncertainty for workplaces across the country, and will reduce
the ability for workplaces to have flexible working arrangements.
The Government does not support this recommendation.
The right to disconnect will provide employees with a high-level right to refuse to monitor,
read or respond to contact, or attempted contact, outside of the employee’s working hours,
unless the refusal is unreasonable. The right to disconnect provisions will provide
workplaces with the flexibility to engage in discussions with their employees about
expectations around contact outside of work hours. Modern awards will also include right to
disconnect terms that can be tailored to align with specific industry standards and
expectations.
Recommendation 3
If the Senate does not agree to repeal the right to disconnect provisions that were
legislated as part of the Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes No.2) Bill
2023, that the Senate pass the amendments circulated by the Coalition on sheets 2416
and 2417, which respectively will remove all civil penalties from the right to disconnect
provisions, and would exempt businesses with less than 20 employees from the right to
disconnect entirely.
The Government does not support this recommendation.
The right to disconnect provisions, which will commence on 26 August 2024, will not
commence for small business employers and their employees for a further 12 months, that
is until 26 August 2025. A ‘small business employer’ is defined in the Act as having fewer
than 15 employees. This will give small business additional time to make arrangements that
reflect the needs of their workplace.
Page 3 of 4
Additionally, before 26 August 2024, the Fair Work Commission will issue guidelines on the
right to disconnect. These will provide employers and employees with guidance to support
them to understand the right and what it may mean for employers and employers across
different workplaces.
Australian Greens Senators additional comments
The Government notes these additional comments.
Page 4 of 4
