Australian Government response to the
Senate Education and Employment References Committee
report:
“Wage theft? What wage theft?!”: The exploitation of
general and specialist cleaners working in retail chains for
contracting or subcontracting companies
JULY 2024
Acknowledgement
The Australian Government commends the Senate Education and Employment References
Committee on its work in bringing to light the incidence of exploitation of general and
specialist cleaners working in retail chains for contracting or subcontracting companies. The
Government particularly acknowledges the valuable submissions to the inquiry made by 22
individuals and organisations and evidence provided in 5 public hearings.
Response
The Australian National Audit Office responded to recommendation 7 on 22 March 2019.
The Government notes all other recommendations made in the Report. Since May 2022, the
Government has been working to deliver secure jobs, better wages and a fairer workplace
relations system.
As a result of the passage of time since the report was tabled and the action taken by the
Government to respond to key issues raised in the Report, outlined below, a substantive
Government response is no longer appropriate. Many of the Government’s reforms have
been informed by the work and evidence of this Committee, and directly address the
Report’s recommendations.
Outline of reforms relevant to the Report’s recommendations
The Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Secure Jobs, Better Pay) Act 2022 reinvigorates
enterprise bargaining by making it easier to initiate bargaining for a single enterprise
agreement and providing more options to access multi-enterprise bargaining through the
Supported Bargaining Stream, Single Interest Bargaining Stream and Cooperative
Workplaces Bargaining Stream. A key aim of these reforms was to extend the benefits of
bargaining throughout the workforce, with a particular focus on low-paid sectors.
The Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes) Act 2023 introduces a criminal
offence for intentional wage theft of employees’ wages and certain entitlements. This
legislation also enhances the rights and protections for workplace delegates in carrying out
their duties to represent union members.
The Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes No. 2) Act 2024 increases
maximum penalties for standard and serious contraventions of certain civil remedy
provisions in the Fair Work Act 2009 for bodies corporate that are not small business
employers. It also amends right of entry provisions to enhance the ability of entry permit
holders to enter a workplace to investigate suspected wage underpayments.
The Government is also currently progressing, alongside states and territories, a harmonised
approach to national labour hire regulation. This will protect labour hire workers from
exploitation and establish an even playing field for business, irrespective of where a labour
hire provider operates.
Alongside these reforms, the Government has taken targeted action to combat migrant
worker exploitation. It has implemented many of the recommendations of the Migrant
Workers’ Taskforce Report (MWT Report), a number of which relate to issues raised by the
Committee, and is committed to implementing all recommendations in full. The
Government will give serious consideration to relevant findings and conclusions of the
Committee, in particular Recommendations 10 and 20, in addressing the remaining
elements of the MWT Report.
The Government secured the passage of amendments to the employment and migration
frameworks, through the Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Protecting Worker
Entitlements) Act 2023 and Migration Amendment (Strengthening Employer Compliance) Act
2024, to ensure that employers cannot argue that a migrant worker is not entitled to the
same workplace protections as other workers in Australia because of their immigration
status or right to work.
It is also implementing a dedicated package of measures announced in 2023. The
Government is co-designing pilots, with unions, businesses and civil society, which are
intended to address barriers to reporting of exploitation and pursuing workplace claims,
such as a fear of visa cancellation or an expiring visa. It has also allocated $3.9 million over
two years to the Fair Work Ombudsman (FWO) in the 2023-24 MYEFO to support the FWO’s
role in pilots, thus bolstering its role in assisting vulnerable workers, including those from
migrant and culturally diverse backgrounds.
The Government continues to make progress in its efforts to combat illegal phoenix activity
designed to avoid liabilities including taxes and employee entitlements. A dedicated
Taskforce comprising key federal, state and territory government agencies are working
together to protect public revenue, businesses, and employee entitlements by taking action
to reduce illegal phoenix activity.
