Australian Government response to the
Senate Select Committee into the Provision of and Access to
Dental Services in Australia report:
A system in decay: a review into dental
services in Australia
JULY 2024
Acknowledgements
The Australian Government (the Government) thanks the Select Committee for its Inquiry
into the Provision of and Access to Dental Services in Australia. The Government also thanks
all individuals and organisations who contributed to the inquiry, particularly to those who
have shared their personal experiences accessing dental services.
Overview
On 8 March 2023, the Senate established the Select Committee into the Provision of and
Access to Dental Services in Australia to inquire into matters relating to the nation’s oral and
dental health, and access to services.
Multiple hearings were held across Australia; the Department of Health and Aged Care
appeared at the Hearing in Canberra on 20 October 2023. The Committee delivered its final
report in November 2023 and highlighted inequities in the current oral healthcare system
including barriers to access services. The committee made 35 recommendations to improve
oral health status for all Australians. These recommendations are summarised as:
• More equitable access
• Better integration
• National data and coordination
• Awareness and education
• Culturally safe, accessible care.
The Australian Government response supports (or supports in principle) 11 of the 35
recommendations, and the remaining 24 recommendations are noted. The Government
already has arrangements in place to address some of the recommendations.
Some recommendations have financial implications which need to be considered in context
with the Government’s other competing budget priorities. Therefore, support and support
in-principle do not represent a commitment to funding.
Some of the recommendations do not fall within the remit of the Australian Government.
In-principle support for these recommendations indicates agreement with the benefits of
these recommendations but recognises that another party, including state and territory
governments, are responsible for their funding and implementation.
The Government recognises that oral health is fundamental to overall health, wellbeing, and
quality of life. Poor oral health has significant adverse impacts at individual, societal, and
economic levels.
The Government supports access to oral healthcare services through:
• Federation Funding Agreement (FFA) for adult public dental services;
• Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS);
• National Health Reform Agreement (NHRA) funding for public hospital admitted and
outpatient services;
• Private Health Insurance (PHI) rebates;
• Grants to the Royal Flying Doctors Service (RFDS); and
• The Department of Veterans’ Affairs dental program.
1
The Health Chief Executive Forum (HCEF) established the National Dental Reform Oversight
Group (the Oversight Group) to develop reform options for sustainable and longer-term
funding arrangements that better meet the needs of the communities across Australia,
particularly those of Older Australians and First Nations people. These options will be
presented to Health Ministers for their consideration during 2024.
2
Australian Government response to recommendations
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the Australian Government considers commissioning
biennial national oral health studies—incorporating consistent measures of oral and
dental health, habits and practices, service utilisation and outcomes—alternating between
adults and children.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in principle.
The Government acknowledges that regular studies are important for understanding the
effectiveness of the current oral health system, identifying trends, disparities and challenges
in accessing oral health services, and enabling development of targeted and evidenced
based strategies that can lead to improved oral health outcomes.
The Government currently funds several research studies in population oral health,
conducted by the Australian Research Centre for Population Oral Health (ARCPOH),
primarily focused on promotion of good oral health outcomes and prevention of oral
disease. They are:
• National Dental Telephone Interview Survey (NDTIS), now called National Dental
Care Survey 2023-26 (conducted every three years, with the next planned for
2023-2026);
• National Child Oral Health Study (NCOHS) (conducted every ten years, with the next
planned for 2023-24); and
• National Study Adult Oral Health (NSAOH) (conducted every ten years, with the next
planned for 2027-28).
These surveys collect data on the oral health status of Australian adults and children,
including the average number of decayed, missing, or filled teeth, and use of dental services,
including frequency of dentist visits. Data on dental service usage, dental practices and the
workforce are also collected. Together, the findings of these surveys deliver national-level
evidence on child and adult oral health and access to dental services. The Australian
Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) uses findings from these surveys in their Dental and
Oral Health Report.
The Government will consider opportunities to optimise the frequency of studies,
implement best practice administrative and access arrangements to facilitate timely
reporting and publication, and support continuous improvements to oral health through
research. The Government will also explore opportunities to leverage off existing data
sources wherever possible.
Regular studies provide an ongoing evidence base in relation to specific cohorts whose oral
health needs may differ from those of other Australians. This would support improvement
to targeted dental programs such as the Department of Veteran Affairs (DVA) programs for
veterans.
3
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that the Australian Government commissions research using
data from the Longitudinal Study of Australian Children (LSAC), the Longitudinal Study of
Indigenous Children (LSIC), and the Household, Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia
(HILDA) to provide insights into:
- oral health status, habits and practices, service utilisation, knowledge and
awareness according to demographic factors;
- the way in which dental habits, oral health issues and dental service access interact
with demographic factors;
- how habits and practices change across the life-course; and
- long-term outcomes and impacts.
The research should be used to inform design and promotion of dental programs for
children and to better target funding.
The Government supports this recommendation in principle.
The Government recognises the value in leveraging existing research to inform design and
promotion of dental programs. However, actionable research findings might be limited from
these studies depending on survey characteristics including sample size and response rates.
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the Australian Government formally recognises that oral
health is an essential part of general health.
The Government supports this recommendation.
The Government acknowledges that oral health is fundamental to overall health, wellbeing,
and quality of life of all Australians. Dental policy reform has been made a priority by Health
Ministers across Australia.
The Government is also progressing the development of the next National Oral Health Plan
in collaboration with states and territories. This work will build on the progress of the
existing plan and provide opportunities to incorporate emerging areas of priorities
identified.
Together, these actions recognise oral health as an important part of general health.
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the Australian Government establishes a taskforce
within the Department of Health and Aged Care, overseen by a Chief Dental and Oral
Health Officer, to identify and progress opportunities to integrate oral and dental health
care into primary health care. Opportunities could include:
- Adding an oral health assessment to existing targeted health assessments provided
under Medicare, such as the Health Assessment Items 701, 703, 705, 707, and the
children's Healthy Start for School assessments.
- Introducing an oral health assessment as a standard component of the residential
aged care intake process, and for residential disability care intake.
- Incorporating emergency dental services into nurse-led walk-in centres and/or
hospital emergency departments.
4
- Providing mandatory training in basic oral health assessment and care to general
practitioners and other health professionals.
- Funding and empowering pharmacists and non-dental health professionals to
apply fluoride varnish in regional and remote areas.
- Adding 'oral health practitioners' to the terms of reference for the independent
health workforce scope of practice review, being undertaken in 2023.
- Integrating oral health and dental care within the National Health Reform
Agreement.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government acknowledges that oral health is an important part of general health and
will explore opportunities to support the primary care system to contribute to delivering
better oral health outcomes.
Health Ministers have identified dental policy reform as a priority. The Oversight Group is
developing reform options to better meet the needs of communities across Australia.
Reform options will be presented for Health Ministers’ consideration during 2024.
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends the Department of Health and Aged Care works to increase
the role of dental hygienists and other oral health therapists in providing preventative and
basic oral health care.
The Government supports this recommendation.
The Government acknowledges the important role dental hygienists and other oral health
professionals play in providing preventive and basic oral healthcare to improve the oral
health status of Australians. In recognition of this, on 1 July 2022, the Dental Benefits Rules
2014 were amended to enable dental hygienists, dental therapists, and oral health
therapists to directly claim for some CDBS services using their own provider number. This
followed the Dental Board of Australia (the board) introducing a new Scope of Practice
Registration Standard for dental practitioners in July 2020.
Delivery of adult public dental services is the primary responsibility of states and territories.
Therefore, each jurisdiction determines its own service delivery model. The Commonwealth
provides additional support for delivery of these services through the FFAs.
An independent Scope of Practice Review is underway ‘Unleashing the Potential of our
Health Workforce’ to examine the barriers and incentives health practitioners face working
to their full scope of practice in primary care. This will include dental therapists and other
oral health therapists.
The board, supported in its role by Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency
(AHPRA), is responsible for all matters relating to the registration and regulation of dental
professionals, including dentists, dental hygienists, dental therapists, and oral health
therapists in Australia.
5
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends the Department of Health and Aged Care assesses—with a
view to reducing—regulatory barriers which limit the scope of practice for oral health
practitioners who are trained and certified to proscribe and take radiographs. This could
include reviewing provisions and/or definitions in:
- the Poisons Standard; and
- the Code of Practice and Safety Guide for Radiation Protection in Dentistry.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Poisons Standard is implemented under state and territory legislation. Establishment of
any specific access controls, including those for dental health practitioners, is a matter for
state and territory governments.
The definition of dental practitioner in the Poisons Standard was aligned with the definition
for a health practitioner practicing in the dental health profession in the Therapeutic Goods
Act 1989 (the Act). Any change to the definition in the Poisons Standard would require
careful consideration of implications for the Act and may require legislative reform.
However, noting the evolving role of oral health practitioners, the Government will commit
to raising the definition for discussion at a future meeting of the Advisory Committee on
Medicines Scheduling.
The Government notes that the Australian Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Agency’s
(ARPANSA) statutory Radiation Health Committee has been reviewing the Code of Practice
and Safety Guide for Radiation Protection in Dentistry (2005) as a key project throughout
2023-24.
This has included reviewing the evolving role of oral health practitioners in relation to
radiographs, with a proposal to apply similar provisions and expectations (being responsible
for overall patient care) to oral health practitioners as currently apply to dentists. However,
it should be noted that the application of this code and its provisions (including any revised
version) must acknowledge the authority of the jurisdictional regulators who ultimately
administer state and territory legislation for the use of radiation.
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends the Department of Health and Aged Care works to increase
the role of dental hygienists and other oral health therapists in providing preventative and
basic care by adding a number of preventative oral health service items to the Medicare
Benefits Schedule, under the category of Allied Health Services; and to the Department of
Veterans’ Affairs dental schedule.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government recognises the important role dental hygienists, and dental therapists and
oral health therapists play in improving oral health outcomes for Australians. The DVA
Dental Program covers the costs of veterans’ dental care from approved dental providers,
including dental hygienists, dental therapists, and oral health therapists. The program
provides these preventive health services in partnership with a general or a specialist
dentist. Services include check-ups, repairs, dentures, and teeth implants.
6
Prior to preventative oral health services being funded through the Medicare Benefits
Schedule (MBS), an assessment by the Medical Services Advisory Committee (MSAC) or MBS
Review Advisory Committee (MRAC) is required. The Department of Health and Aged Care
works with relevant stakeholders to build their understanding of this process.
Recommendation 8
The committee recommends that the Australian Government considers commissioning a
study into:
- the impact of cancer and cancer treatment on dental and oral health; and
- the need to provide coverage for oral health treatment, including restorative
services for cancer survivors, including survivors of head, neck and oral cancers.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government acknowledges the impact cancer and cancer treatment can have on
people’s dental and oral health.
The Government will consider options for improving access to dental and oral health
treatment and restorative services for cancer patients, including the implementation of the
Australian Cancer Plan (the Plan) launched on 2 November 2023. Action 3.2.3 of the Plan
recognises new models of care will be required to manage chronic disease and longer-term
impacts of cancer treatment, as more people live longer with, or beyond, cancer.
Recommendation 9
The committee recommends that the Australian Government reviews the Medicare
Benefits Schedule with a view to improving the accessibility of oral health treatment,
including restorative services, for cancer survivors, including survivors of head, neck and
oral cancers.
The Government notes this recommendation.
Under the MBS, there is a range of oral and maxillofacial medical services that attract
benefits (rebates) when performed by a medical practitioner or approved oral and
maxillofacial surgeons.
MBS reconstructive items that may be applicable to survivors of head, neck, and oral
cancers include but are not limited to, microvascular head and neck reconstruction items,
maxilla and mandible reconstruction items, and intra-oral implantation and fixation items.
Effective 1 July 2023, there were changes to approximately 360 MBS items for plastic and
reconstructive surgery. These changes were a result of recommendations from the MBS
Review Taskforce that considered how more than 5,700 items on the MBS can be aligned
with contemporary clinical evidence and practice and improve health outcomes for patients.
The Taskforce recommendations were informed by the Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery
Clinical Committee and included changes to cranio-maxillofacial and oral and maxillofacial
surgery services.
The Clinical Committee considered that cranio-maxillofacial and oral and maxillofacial
surgery has undergone major changes in the last 20 years due to changes in technology and
fixation techniques.
7
The recommendations of the Clinical Committee resulted in amendments to a range of
items for cranio-maxillofacial/oral and maxillofacial surgery, including maxilla and mandible
reconstruction items and oral tumour items, to update terminology and practices to allow
for modern best clinical practice.
For a new medical service to be funded through the MBS, including new restorative oral
procedures for survivors of head, neck and oral cancers, an assessment by the MSAC is
required.
Anyone can apply to the MSAC, however, due to the level of evidence required, a medical
professional group is generally best placed to provide the necessary research and trial data.
Recommendation 10
The committee recommends that the Australian Government provides seed funding for a
national oral health promotion and advocacy body, similar to the Heart Foundation.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government routinely consults with expert dental and oral health organisations. The
Government currently has an open and transparent process for health peak bodies to apply
for funding. The Health Peak and Advisory Bodies Program is a capped, competitive grant
program that supports selected peak bodies over a three-year period. The program aims to
build capacity in the health sector to complement the work undertaken by all health peak
and advisory bodies.
Recommendation 11
The committee recommends that the Australian Government works with states and
territories to find ways to ensure access to adequate general and oral health services for
people who are incarcerated.
The Government notes this recommendation.
States and territories manage the prison system including service delivery of health and oral
health services. The Government will work collaboratively with state and territory
governments to progress this recommendation.
Recommendation 12
The committee recommends that the Australian Government implements the oral health
care recommendations from the Royal Commission into Aged Care Quality and Safety.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government acknowledges that older Australians experience poorer oral health
outcomes and experience greater barriers to accessing dental and oral care.
There is currently a breadth of work underway to address recommendations relating to
dental and oral health, made by the Royal Commission into Aged Care Quality and Safety. As
part of this effort, quality standards will be reviewed and updated, multidisciplinary
outreach services will be tested out for older adults in aged care, and roles and
responsibilities related to providing health care to older adults in aged care will be made
clear.
8
Recommendation 13
The committee recommends that the Australian Government considers the establishment
of a Seniors Dental Benefit Scheme.
The Government notes this recommendation.
Recommendation 60 of the Royal Commission into Aged Care Quality and Safety includes
establishing a new Senior Dental Benefit Scheme to fund dental services for people who live
in residential aged care or who live in the community and receive the age pension or qualify
for the Commonwealth Seniors Health Card. The National Dental Reform Oversight Group,
represented by each state and territory and the Commonwealth, is currently conducting
analyses to consider improved access to public dental services for priority groups, including
people in residential aged care and older Australians living in the community. Options will
be presented for Health Ministers’ consideration during 2024.
Recommendation 14
The committee recommends that states and territories take into account the need for
culturally safe and effective treatment for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Australians.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The delivery of public dental services is the primary responsibility of the states and
territories. Therefore, each jurisdiction determines all elements of service delivery including
priority populations for eligibility and design of the services. The Commonwealth will
continue to work collaboratively with jurisdictions to increase equitable access for public
dental services.
While the responsibility for service provision primarily lies with the states and territories, in
recognition of the unique needs of NT, the Department of Health and Aged Care administers
the Health Implementation Plan under the National Partnership Agreement on Northern
Territory Remote Aboriginal Investment (NTRAI), which provides funding for programs to
improve oral and hearing health outcomes for First Nations children under 16 in the
Northern Territory (NT). A total of $7.359 million is being provided in 2023-24 for the Health
Implementation Plan, of which $3.302 million is allocated for the Oral Health Program
(OHP).
The OHP is designed to complement the NT Government’s Child Oral Health Program by
providing additional preventive (application of full-mouth fluoride varnish and fissure
sealants) and clinical (tooth extractions, diagnostics, restorations and examinations)
services, with a particular focus on remote areas. Ahead of the NTRAI’s expiration on
30 June 2024, a Joint Steering Committee has been convened to design future arrangements
for remote service delivery in the NT. The Committee is comprised of representatives from
the National Indigenous Australians Agency, Aboriginal Peak Organisations NT, the NT
Government and the Department of Health and Aged Care.
The Government’s National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Workforce Strategic
Framework and Implementation Plan 2021-2031 (Workforce Plan) aims to increase the
number of First Nations people in the health workforce, including those in dental and oral
healthcare, to population parity by 2031 and strengthen the cultural safety of the health
system overall.
9
The Workforce Plan is guided by six overarching strategic directions and 47 implementation
strategies to attract, recruit, and retain First Nations health professionals, which includes
those in dental and oral healthcare. This includes developing co-designed initiatives to
increase and support Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people entering the health
workforce, such as flexible workplace and education arrangements, and trainee leadership,
mentoring and support networks.
The Workforce Plan also notes the importance of attractive and accessible pathways to
retain and grow existing Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health care workforce,
particularly in regional and remote areas of Australia.
Recommendation 15
The committee recommends that the Australian Government works with state and
territory governments to revise state-based legislation and regulations that prevent non
dental health professionals from applying fluoride varnish treatments and fluoride salts,
including in regional and remote areas of Australia.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The delivery of public dental services is the responsibility of the states and territories and
therefore it is up to each state and territory to establish eligibility requirements, state-based
legislation, and regulation for oral health services within their jurisdictions.
Recommendation 16
The committee recommends that the Australian Government examines the potential use
of fluoride salts in areas that cannot have fluoridated water.
The Government notes this recommendation.
In Australia, community water fluoridation programs are a safe, effective and ethical way of
reducing tooth decay across the population. Fluoridated water is the primary source of
fluoride exposure and helps reduce tooth decay for all, at all stages of life. This includes
those who have access to dental care and other measures that help protect teeth from
decay. Fluoridated water reaches everyone in the community and does not rely on people
visiting dental clinics.
The Government will continue to explore with states and territories options for fluoridated
water in areas that do not have access to it.
Recommendation 17
The committee recommends that the Australian Government investigates expanding
access to Tranexamic acid to dentists, such as by adding Tranexamic acid mouthwash to
the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.
The Government notes this recommendation.
There are currently no tranexamic acid mouthwash products approved by the Therapeutic
Goods Administration (TGA), Australia’s regulator of medicines and other therapeutic goods.
TGA approval status of a medicine is important because the Pharmaceutical Benefits
Scheme (PBS) listing process relies, in part, on the scientific assessment of evidence
regarding safety and clinical effectiveness that serves as the basis for TGA approval.
10
The PBS is the main mechanism through which the Government subsidises the cost of
medicines for the treatment of Australian patients. Tranexamic acid tablet 500 mg is
currently listed on the PBS as an unrestricted benefit for prescribing by medical practitioners
and nurse practitioners.
Under legislation, the Government cannot list a new medicine on the PBS unless the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC) makes a recommendation in favour of
its listing. Similarly, the Government relies on the advice of the PBAC when considering
changes to the circumstances under which existing PBS medicines are listed, such as
addition of a prescriber type.
The PBAC considers submissions from industry sponsors of medicines and medicinal
products, medical bodies, health professionals, and private individuals and their
representatives. However, for new products or new indications, it is normally the sponsor or
manufacturer who holds the data required for such a submission. Sponsors usually engage
public health and health economics experts to review the academic literature and help the
company prepare a submission to the PBAC.
Recommendation 18
The committee recommends that the National Disability Insurance Agency clarifies that
dental and oral health supports that are directly required because of a person's disability
can be funded under the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS), and provides
specific training and guidance for NDIS decision makers. The kinds of supports that could
be funded include:
- oral splints that assist with speaking or swallowing;
- modified toothbrushes and flossing devices; and
- any other reasonable and necessary oral health care consumables.
The Government supports this recommendation.
The National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA) publishes information about the decision-
making process and the factors taken into consideration under the NDIS on the NDIS
website. Guidelines are used by staff and participants and are based on NDIS legislation and
rules. These are supported by a series of “would we fund it” examples of commonly
requested items that have caused confusion. The NDIS website explains how the decision to
or not to fund these items are made.
Currently there are no “would we fund it” examples about dental and oral health. The NDIA
will develop new examples about dental and oral health supports. These will be published
on the NDIS website by mid-2024.
Recommendation 19
The committee recommends that the Australian Government supports the dental industry
to incorporate new training and competency requirements for dentists and other oral
health professionals in treating people with disabilities and complex needs.
The Government notes this recommendation.
11
The Government recognises the importance of an appropriately skilled dental and oral
health workforce for treating people with disabilities and complex needs The Dental Board
of Australia (the board) has appointed the Australian Dental Council (ADC) to assess the
skills, knowledge, and professional attributes of those who seek to gain registration in
Australia. The ADC is also responsible for accrediting dentistry education and training
programs.
Under Australia’s Disability Strategy 2021-2031, Health and Wellbeing is one of the seven
outcome areas. Through the Strategy all levels of government recognise good health and
wellbeing are critical determinants of a person’s quality of life. The Strategy’s Outcomes
Framework measures health and wellbeing outcomes throughout the lives of people with
disability, with indicators focused on health and wellbeing, prevention and early
interventions, mental health and emergency response.
The Government is committed to addressing the serious health inequities experienced by
people with disability and is in the process of working with states and territories to consider
the recommendations of the Royal Commission into Violence, Abuse, Neglect and
Exploitation of People with Disability. The Government has committed to providing an initial
response to the Royal Commission by mid-2024.
In August 2021, the National Roadmap for Improving the Health of People with Intellectual
Disability (Roadmap) was released. A key objective of the roadmap is to improve oral health
of people with intellectual disability, recognising that improved oral health is a central
requirement for improving general health and wellbeing. The Roadmap also recognises the
need to improve education, training and continuing professional development for health
professionals to enable them to provide better care for people with intellectual disability.
Recommendation 20
The committee recommends that the Australian Government makes the necessary
changes to National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) regulations to allow assessment,
recommendations, and support to be provided by dental hygienists, oral health therapists
and other oral health professionals, under the NDIS, for people whose disability directly
impacts their oral health.
The Government notes this recommendation.
This recommendation crosses over with recommendations from the NDIS Review. These are
being further considered by governments as part of the response to the NDIS Review.
Recommendation 21
The committee recommends that the Australian Government implements the
recommendations from the Report on the Fifth Review of the Dental Benefits Act 2008.
The Government supports this recommendation in principle.
The Department of Health and Aged Care is currently progressing implementation of the
recommendations of the Fifth Review Report of the Dental Benefits Act 2008 and will seek
the expertise of the Dental Clinical Advisory Committee for further analyses of relevant
recommendations.
12
Recommendation 22
The committee recommends that the Australian Government develops a plan and timeline
to expand access to the Child Dental Benefits Schedule to all children, over time, initially
targeting better access for disadvantaged and vulnerable children.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Child Dental Benefits Schedule (CDBS) is currently significantly under-utilised (30%
utilisation) despite nearly 45% of all Australian children being eligible. The Department of
Health and Aged Care is actively working to collaborate with stakeholders to improve the
uptake of this program. For instance, in 2023, the Behavioural Economics Team of the
Australian Government (BETA) undertook a survey of 5000 eligible families to understand
reasons for the low uptake. The findings demonstrate that confusion around eligibility,
parental health literacy and cost as potential barriers for uptake. As a result, the
Department of Health and Aged Care is working together with Services Australia to review
the notification of eligibility while exploring avenues to promote CDBS.
The Fifth Review Report of the Dental Benefits Act 2008 has recommended modification of
the CDBS to include dental service access for children in rural and remote areas, First
Nations children and children with a disability. These recommendations are currently being
reviewed by the Dental Clinical Advisory Committee.
Recommendation 23
The committee recommends that the Australian Government introduces a remote area
loading for services delivered under the Child Dental Benefits Schedule in remote and very
remote areas of Australia.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government understands that oral health status declines as remoteness increases.
Introducing loading for services in remote areas is complex and would require legislative
change.
The Government has a long-term funding partnership with the Royal Flying Doctor Service
(RFDS) to provide essential primary health care in rural and remote areas. The current RFDS
Grant Agreement is a 5-year Agreement (November 2022 to 30 June 2027). In 2022-23, the
RFDS provided 58,976 dental health services across Australia.
Recommendation 24
The committee recommends that the Australian Government works with the states and
territories to ensure access to general anaesthetic, and other forms of sedation, can be
provided in an accessible and timely way. This will support access to dental care for
persons with disabilities and/or complex needs who require sedation.
The Government notes this recommendation.
There are risks associated with the use of general anaesthesia and other sedation
techniques. Therefore, benefits are not allowed under the CDBS and the DVA Dental
Program for these services.
13
However, the Commonwealth provides funding for states and territories for the delivery of
inpatient (and some outpatient) dental services through the National Health Reform
Agreement (NHRA), including services that are offered under general anaesthesia. Each
jurisdiction determines its service delivery model including how services requiring sedation
are delivered.
Treatment under general anaesthesia/sedation for children with disabilities and/or complex
needs was a recommendation of the Fifth Review of the Dental Benefits Act 2008 and the
National Roadmap for Improving the Health of People with Intellectual Disability. The
Department of Health and Aged Care is considering these recommendations and currently
seeking the expertise of the Dental Clinical Advisory Committee in its review of the
recommendations relating to the use of general anaesthesia for eligible children under the
CDBS.
Recommendation 25
The committee recommends that the Australian Government works with the states and
territories to improve remuneration and conditions for dentists and oral health
practitioners practicing in the public sector, so these may be more competitive with the
private sector.
The Government notes this recommendation.
States and territories have the primary responsibility for the delivery of public dental
services, including managing their workforce and associated expenses, including
remuneration. The Commonwealth currently provides additional funding through the FFA
for delivery of public dental services for adults.
The Government is working with states and territories to reform funding arrangements,
providing greater funding certainty that will support workforce recruitment and retention.
Recommendation 26
The committee recommends that the Australian Government considers supporting
universities located in regional areas to establish dental schools, or expand current courses
to accommodation [sic] more students.
The Government supports this recommendation in principle.
The Rural Health Multidisciplinary Training (RHMT) Program supports 22 universities,
forming a national network of Rural Clinical Schools (RCS), University Departments of Rural
Health (UDRH) and Regional Training Hubs to provide infrastructure and academic networks
for teaching and training medicine, nursing, allied health and dentistry students and to
support pathways to rural practice.
In 2021 and 2022, the Government undertook a feasibility study into improving dental and
oral health training outcomes in rural settings. A report was produced outlining study
findings and strategies to improve rural training outcomes following extensive stakeholder
engagement and in-depth consultation with an Expert Reference Group of sector specialists.
14
The proposed strategies that align to this recommendation include:
• Embedding oral health training through the RHMT UDRH network to identify greater
clinical placement opportunities, provide supervision and support to students,
develop greater training networks, and embed oral health as part of a
multidisciplinary approach.
• Establishment of a rural dental and oral health clinical school, modelling the
approaches of existing RHMT RCSs, to develop a rural clinical and teaching dental
and oral health hub to build clinical, teaching, supervision and research capacity and
capability that supports placements and service delivery in rural and remote
communities.
The Australian Government is continuing to consider these recommendations.
Recommendation 27
The committee recommends that universities be incentivised to implement alternative
entry pathways, such as Principals' recommendations, and allocate specific course places
for regional and remote students to study dentistry and oral health.
The Government notes this recommendation.
In 2021 and 2022, the Government undertook a feasibility study into improving dental and
oral health training outcomes in rural settings. A report was produced outlining study
findings and strategies to improve rural training outcomes following extensive stakeholder
engagement and in-depth consultation with an Expert Reference Group of sector specialists.
The proposed strategies that align to this recommendation include that universities
participating in the RHMT program should demonstrate student selection and admissions
processes to identify and increase the intake of rural students to meet or exceed rural origin
targets.
Recommendation 28
The committee recommends that the Australian Government considers funding evidence-
based programs to incentivise dental and oral health providers to practice in regional and
remote areas of Australia.
The Government supports this recommendation in principle.
The proposed strategies that align to this recommendation from the 2021-2022 RHMT
feasibility study include embedding oral health training through the RHMT UDRH network to
identify greater clinical placement opportunities, to provide supervision and support to
students, to develop greater training networks, and embedding oral health as part of a
multidisciplinary approach.
The Australian Government is continuing to consider the recommendation made by the
Dental Feasibility Study, and the Department of Health and Aged Care continues to work
alongside dental training and UDRH networks to explore possibilities within the existing
scope of the program.
15
Recommendation 29
The committee recommends that the Australian Government expands existing medical
student rural subsidy programs to include dental and oral health students.
The Government supports this recommendation in principle.
The proposed strategies that align to this recommendation from the 2021-2022 RHMT
feasibility study include establishing a rural dental and oral health clinical school, modelling
the approaches of existing RHMT RCSs, developing a rural clinical and teaching dental and
oral health hub to build clinical, teaching, supervision and research capacity and capability
that supports placements and service delivery in rural and remote communities.
The Australian Government is continuing to consider these recommendations.
Recommendation 30
The committee recommends that the Australian Government investigates implementing a
requirement for a 12-month compulsory paid placement working within the public health
system following graduation in order to qualify for the dental license/complete their
studies.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Dental Board of Australia (the Board) is responsible for all matters relating to the
regulation of the dental profession in Australia, including determining the registration
requirements to practice in Australia. The Dental Board does not have the ability to restrict
the practice of a dental graduate to public only practice. The Board is supported in its role
by AHPRA and each of these bodies operate independently of Government.
Recommendation 31
The committee recommends the Australian Government works to increase the size of the
oral health therapist workforce by putting into place incentives to study oral health
therapy and providing scholarships for students from regional areas and Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander students.
The Government supports this recommendation in principle.
Currently, the Government funds a range of tailored workforce programs that include
training and initiatives designed to increase the First Nations workforce across Australia,
including in rural and remote areas. Key initiatives include:
• Indigenous Allied Health Australia (IAHA), a national member-based Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander allied health organisation, who support Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander allied health students and graduates. IAHA also supports the broader
allied health workforce and its associate membership of individuals and
organisations with expertise, interest and commitment to improving the health and
wellbeing of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander peoples. This program relates to
core operational and advocacy work in relation to all First Nations allied health
professionals, which can include dental or oral health.
16
• IAHA National Health Academy program that works with high school students from
years 7-12, starting with health literacy, moving to leadership and career planning
and transitioning into the Health Academy in Years 11 and 12. Pathways lead to
careers in health and may include dental or oral health. Health Academies currently
operate in five locations: Darwin, South- East Queensland, Northern Rivers (New
South Wales), Greater Western Sydney and the Australian Capital Territory.
The Department of Health and Aged Care also funds the Indigenous Health Worker
Traineeship program, which provides government funded traineeships for First Nations
people working within Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Services to attain
qualifications in health and community services. Further scholarships that include oral
health include:
• The Allied Health Rural Generalist Pathway (AHRGP) and Allied Health Assistant
Workforce Program (AHAWP) is a professional and career development strategy to
improve the range of skills of the Allied Health workforce in rural and remote
Australia to meet emerging community health needs.
• The Puggy Hunter Memorial Scholarship Scheme (PHMSS) aims to increase the First
Nations peoples’ participations in the health workforce through the provision of
financial assistance to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander undergraduate students
studying health related disciplines in a university, TAFE, or Registered Training
Organisation.
• The Indigenous Health Scholarships Program through Australian Rotary Health
provides scholarships to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people undertaking
health related studies.
The RHMT feasibility study recommended several strategies that may help increase the oral
health workforce in rural and remote areas. These strategies include:
• Ensure requirements of dental and oral health training align with evidence for rural
practice.
• Embedding oral health training through the RHMT UDRH network to identify greater
clinical placement opportunities, provide supervision and support to students,
develop greater training networks, and embed oral health as part of a
multidisciplinary approach.
• Establishment of a rural dental and oral health clinical school, modelling the
approaches of existing RHMT RCSs, to develop a rural clinical and teaching dental
and oral health hub to build clinical, teaching, supervision and research capacity and
capability that supports placements and service delivery in rural and remote
communities.
• Growing our First Nations dental and oral health workforce and establishing the
Indigenous Dental Association of Australia (IDAA) as a workforce peak body to
provide leadership and support in this space.
The Australian Government is continuing to consider these recommendations.
17
Recommendation 32
The committee recommends that the Australian Government adequately recognises the
need for Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisations to:
- train general health care providers in delivering basic and preventative oral health
care; and
- recruit and retain dentists, and other oral health practitioners, to work in regional
and remote areas of Australia.
The Government supports this recommendation in principle.
The Government recognises the critical health care workforce challenges in regional and
remote areas of Australia and is committed to working in genuine partnership with the
Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Sector and other key primary health stakeholders
to help address the workforce challenges currently being faced in the remote communities.
Recommendation 33
The committee recommends that the Australian Government appoints a Chief Dental and
Oral Health Officer and establishes an Office of Dental and Oral Health in the Department
of Health and Aged Care, to coordinate national reforms.
The Government notes this recommendation.
Currently, the Government seeks expert clinical advice from the state and territory dental
directors, internal dental advisors, and the Dental Clinical Advisory Committee.
Recommendation 34
The committee recommends that the Department of Veterans' Affairs improves rebates
provided to dental prosthetists to achieve parity with the rates paid to dentists, to correct
the price discrepancy.
The Government notes this recommendation.
Dental treatment has been a feature of the Department of Veteran’s Affairs health care
arrangements since the inception of the repatriation program in 1918 with a number of
changes from reviews into new or emerging trends.
The DVA Dental Program supports the oral health of DVA clients who hold a Veteran Gold
Card, or Veteran White Card with an accepted dental condition.
The Program provides funding to participating dental providers on a fee-for-service basis,
using two broad fee schedules, one for dentists and dental specialists and another for dental
prosthetists. The schedules list a comprehensive suite of services, including preventive
treatment such as examinations and cleaning; simple treatment such as fillings and
extractions; complex treatment such as crowns, bridges, implants and dentures; and
treatment of oral diseases including gum disease and dental caries.
In 2022-23, DVA provided over 52,000 dental prosthetic services to 10,400 clients at a cost
of over $10 million. Of these services, 37 per cent were provided by dental prosthetists.
The Government acknowledges the current difference in remuneration between dental
prosthetists and general dentists for delivering services under DVA dental arrangements.
18
Recommendation 35
The committee recommends that the Australian Government works with the states and
territories to achieve universal access to dental and oral health care, which expands
coverage under Medicare or a similar scheme for essential oral health care, over time, in
stages.
The Government notes this recommendation.
Governments are working together to progress dental reform priorities including long-term
funding options which would offer funding stability, enhance service accessibility, and assist
state and territory governments in achieving oral health outcomes by means of improved
service design, implementation, and workforce recruitment and retention. Health Ministers
are exploring opportunities to improve access to dental and oral health services, particularly
for priority populations including First Nations people and older Australians.
19
