Australian Government response to the
Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee
report:
COVID-19 Royal Commission
JULY 2024
On 19 October 2023, the Senate referred the terms of reference for a COVID-19 Royal Commission to the
Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee for inquiry and report by 31 March 2024. On 26
March 2024, the Committee extended its reporting date from 31 March 2024 and tabled a Report on 19
April 2024. The Government thanks witnesses and submitters for their contributions to the inquiry.
As is noted in the Dissenting Report of Senators Green and Ghosh, on 21 September 2023 the Prime
Minister the Hon Anthony Albanese MP announced an independent inquiry into Australia’s response to the
COVID-19 pandemic.
That inquiry is being conducted by an independent panel who have extensive experience across public
health, social care, government and economics. The inquiry has noted that its terms of reference are very
broad, permitting it to consider all key aspects of the national response to the pandemic, including the
interface of that response with other levels of government and its impact on Australian citizens. More than
2,000 people and organisations have made submissions to the inquiry. The inquiry is due to provide a final
report to Government by the end of September 2024.
The Government’s response to the Committee’s recommendations is as follows:
Recommendation Government Response
Committee Report
1 Recommendation 1 The Government does not support this recommendation.
The committee recommends that the
federal government establishes a royal
commission to examine the Australian
response to the COVID-19 pandemic
and the consequential impacts on the
Australian community.
2 Recommendation 2 The Government does not support this recommendation.
The committee recommends that the
federal government encourages the
states and territories to pass
complementary legislation that would
enable them to participate in the royal
commission. State and territory
governments that do not initially join
the royal commission should be able to
join the royal commission at a later
date if they agree to do so.
Recommendation 3 The Government does not support this recommendation.
The committee recommends that the
federal government adopt the terms of
refence outlined in paragraphs 3.99
and 3.100 as the draft terms of
reference.
2
Recommendation Government Response
Recommendation 4 The Government does not support this recommendation.
The committee recommends that the
draft terms of reference for a COVID-
19 Royal Commission are made
available for public comment to allow
the people of Australia an opportunity
to provide input on the terms of
reference prior to adoption.
3
