Australian Government response to the
Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade References Committee
report:
Efficacy of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade due
diligence framework
September 2024
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the opportunity to respond to the report of the Foreign
Affairs, Defence and Trade References Committee (‘the Committee’) on its inquiry into the:
Efficacy of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (‘DFAT’) due diligence framework
(‘the report’).
The Government recognises and appreciates the work of the Committee. The report is
comprehensive and detailed, with four recommendations. The Government also notes the
additional comments from some members of the Committee, including their concerns about
recommendations one, two and three.
The Government has carefully considered the report and does not accept recommendations
one and two. The Government notes recommendations three and four.
DFAT makes extensive use of a range of partners, and in turn their downstream partners, to
support implementation of the Australian development program. DFAT’s Due Diligence
Framework (the Framework) is part of its broader risk management approach, applying a
structured and consistent methodology to review a potential partner’s ability to deliver
services in line with the policy requirements of the Australian development program. The
Framework assists financial delegates to satisfy Public Governance, Performance and
Accountability Act 2013 requirements to discharge their duties with the degree of care and
diligence a reasonable person would exercise.
The Framework is one element of the Government’s risk management approach to the
delivery of official development assistance in the high-risk context of Myanmar. DFAT’s
approach extends beyond the selection assessment of partners to the close monitoring of
program delivery and implementation. DFAT actively monitors programs throughout their
life-cycle to confirm that Australian assistance has been delivered as intended and has not
been misdirected to the regime.
The Government remains deeply concerned about the situation in Myanmar, and the ongoing
repression and violence by the military regime. The Government remains committed to
supporting the people of Myanmar through the provision of sustained development and
humanitarian assistance. The Government does not provide direct funding to the Myanmar
military regime and takes proactive steps to ensure assistance is neither diverted to the regime
nor legitimises or gives credibility to the regime.
1
Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the Australian Government direct the Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade to develop and implement an alternative and more flexible
due diligence framework to be used when a recipient community is in a defined contested
environment.
Response: Not accepted.
The Government does not accept this recommendation. Under Australia’s International
Development Policy, we will continue to deliver a high-quality, effective development
program underpinned by rigorous performance and delivery frameworks.
The Government considers the existing Due Diligence Framework used by DFAT fit-for-
purpose. The Framework allows DFAT to employ a risk-based approach to the engagement
of a wide range of implementing partners, many of whom operate in difficult
environments.
The Framework establishes important minimum requirements for any implementing
partner delivering development cooperation or humanitarian assistance, regardless of the
environment. These minimum requirements are reflected in the seven criteria applied for a
baseline due diligence assessment (Entity Details; Past Performance; Fraud and Corruption
Control; Proscribed List Checks; Integrity System Checks; Child Protection; and
Preventing Sexual Exploitation, Abuse and Harassment). Delegates may elect to include
additional assessment criteria depending on a range of factors such as the complexity and
financial value of the activity, operating environment and delivery arrangements.
Guidance for departmental officers provides some flexibility in how assessments are
conducted. It outlines a range of evidence that can be used to complete assessments and
indicates they are to be based on a pragmatic evaluation of the best available evidence at
the time of completion.
The Framework is a risk management tool and not a hard gate for funding, except in
instances where a potential partner is on one of DFAT’s prohibited dealings lists
(e.g. sanctions). It is used to ensure that the delegate has the information they need to make
an informed decision, including how risks identified in the assessment process will be
mitigated.
DFAT is currently considering the recommendations from a strategic review of the
Australian NGO Cooperation Program (‘ANCP’) accreditation process and funding
policies to ensure these are fit for purpose and able to adapt to multiple contexts, including
in Myanmar. ANCP accreditation is a rigorous process, which aligns with and satisfies
DFAT’s due diligence requirements.
2
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that the Australian Government direct the Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade to develop a decision support tool to assist officers conducting
risk management assessments to make it easier to facilitate better distribution of aid
funding using the proposed contested environment due diligence framework.
Response: Not accepted.
The Government does not accept this recommendation. DFAT has a comprehensive risk
management policy with procedures and supporting systems to assist officers conducting
risk management assessments in relation to development and humanitarian investments.
Risk management is a key focus of the investment design process and is subject to testing
and quality assurance. For every investment, there is screening for mandatory policy
considerations, including environmental and social safeguards, fraud and corruption and
terrorism resourcing risks, as well as other common risk factors. Risks associated with a
potential implementing partner, identified through the due diligence assessment process,
are also incorporated into investment risk registers stored on the department’s online
program management platform, AidWorks.
Delegates approving investment designs are responsible for ensuring all material risks have
been identified and appropriate management controls and treatments are in place. The Risk
Appetite Statement and Tolerances Levels for the development program provide guidance
to departmental officers as to which categories of risk require greater attention in decision
making and management effort during implementation.
A strong focus on risk management is maintained throughout the implementation phase of
an investment. DFAT recommends that investment managers review investment risk
registers at least quarterly. In addition, all investments over $3 million are required to
undergo an annual performance assessment, which includes criteria related to risk
management.
3
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the Australian Government utilise any new due
diligence framework to engage with and strengthen ties with aid partners and
stakeholders on the ground in contested environments, such as the National Unity
Government, faith-based non-government organisations and civil society organisations.
Response: Noted.
The Government notes this recommendation.
Although the Government does not accept recommendations one and two, it notes the
intent of this recommendation in terms of strengthening localisation, which is a key
commitment of Australia’s International Development Policy.
Australia already engages with development and humanitarian partners and stakeholders on
the ground in contested environments, including Myanmar.
The Government appreciates the importance of hearing and understanding the voices of all
stakeholders in Myanmar. Australian officials engage with representatives of the National
Unity Government, faith-based non-government organisations (NGOs), civil society
organisations and other groups. Australia will continue to engage with all relevant
stakeholders to reduce the politicisation of international development assistance, and to
advocate for access to people in need and the safety of those providing assistance.
Australia’s development and humanitarian assistance for Myanmar is delivered through
United Nations (UN) agencies, multilateral and regional partners, international NGOs,
local NGOs and local civil society organisations. While Australia’s direct funding partners
are mostly multilateral agencies and international NGOs, they partner with local groups to
deliver assistance.
4
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that further details be released as soon as possible on the
Australian Government’s new International Development Policy’s key commitments on:
- providing multi-year funding and capacity development to local organisations, with
support as needed to meet policy requirements; and
- designing a new Civil Society Partnerships Fund that will support local CSOs.
In particular, detailing how these programs will apply in the context of Myanmar and
resolve the challenges being faced under the current framework.
Response: Noted.
The Government notes this recommendation. Australia’s International Development Policy
prioritises locally-led development, multi-year funding and capacity development to local
organisations, with support as needed to meet policy requirements. The policy also
includes a commitment to design a new Civil Society Partnerships Fund that will support
local civil society organisations. DFAT will release further details as arrangements are
developed.
To facilitate implementation of these commitments, DFAT has recently published new
guidance on supporting locally-led development. The guidance emphasises there is no ‘one
size fits all’ approach to locally-led development programming. Further detail will be
outlined at country-level in Development Partnership Plans, and at program-level through
investment designs, taking into account factors such as country context, development
objectives, delivery models, partners, risk and safeguarding.
Providing support for organisational capability (e.g. financial management, child protection
policies) will be central to locally-led development: this can be provided directly in
funding agreements or via intermediaries. Strategies will be tailored with the local
organisation.
In certain contexts, it may not be possible to partner directly with local actors. In those
cases, DFAT will work indirectly through intermediaries such as Australian NGOs,
international NGOs, multilateral agencies and managing contractors. For example, to
advance locally-led development, ANCP allows partner NGOs to plan multi-year programs
and projects, and is also trialling a ‘pass down’ of a minimum $10,000 for each Australian
NGO annual grant to local partners to support their administrative costs.
The Government has a range of multi-year humanitarian and development programs in
Myanmar across several sectors, where the direct implementing partner is a multilateral
agency or international NGO, but which partner with a range of local organisations to
implement activities on the ground. Many of these programs provide multi-year funding
and capacity development for local organisations. Noting the sensitivities and security
situation in Myanmar, the Government does not publicise the details of local implementing
partners. This is at their request.
5
