Australian Government response to the
Joint Committee of Public Accounts and
Audit
Report 495:
Inquiry into Commonwealth grants administration
September 2024
Response to the Committee’s Recommendations
Recommendation 1
2.93 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government implement the
recommendation from JCPAA Report 484 to add an eighth principle to the
Commonwealth Grants Rules and Guidelines that decision makers should adhere to the
guidelines, which the previous Government agreed to but failed to actually implement.
Agreed
The Government will implement this recommendation through the Commonwealth Grants
Rules and Principles 2024 (CGRPs), which come into effect on 1 October 2024. The CGRPs
will replace the Commonwealth Grant Rules and Guidelines 2017.
The CGRPs include a new key principle for grants administration, ‘Consistency with Grant
Guidelines and Established Processes’. Officials involved in grants administration must have
regard to the key principles (paragraph 4.4b) and entities must put in place practices and
procedures to ensure that grants administration is conducted in a manner that is consistent
with the key principles (paragraph 6.3).
Under this new key principle, the CGRPs make clear that:
• decisions to award grants should correspond to the guidelines and the published
process for the grant opportunity, be based on merit, be transparent and well
documented, and align with the objectives of the grant opportunity.
• grant opportunity guidelines should document the circumstances in which the
eligibility or assessment criteria set out in grant opportunity guidelines may be waived
or amended, along with the strategies that will be used to mitigate any disadvantage to
potential grantees from waiving or amending selection criteria. Decisions to waive or
amend eligibility and assessment criteria should be taken by the appropriate decision
maker and documented.
• grant opportunity guidelines should not be changed after the grant opportunity is
closed to applications. Decisions to deviate from published guidelines and any
amended processes should be documented and appropriately communicated,
including whether potential grantees will be provided an opportunity to apply or to
revise an application, or whether a new grant opportunity will be issued.
Recommendation 2
2.94 The Committee recommends that the Department of Finance amends its Resource
Management Guide No. 412 – Australian Government Grants – Briefing, Reporting,
Evaluating and Election Commitments to clarify the definition of an election
commitment for the purpose of delivering grants programs.
Agreed
The new CGRPs explicitly state that they apply to all forms and types of grants, including
election commitments (paragraph 2.4).
The Department of Finance will update Resource Management Guide 412 to adopt the
definition of election commitment used by the Parliamentary Budget Office.
Recommendation 3
2.95 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government amends the
Commonwealth Grants Rules and Guidelines 2017 to provide that:
• Competitive, merit-based processes must be adopted by default with program
design guidelines or decision makers required to document appropriately detailed
reasons when a non-competitive approach is utilised, acknowledging there are
legitimate circumstances where it is appropriate or preferable to do so including
urgent situations such as disasters, or instances where there are only limited
suitable grant recipients to give effect to election commitments or a policy.
• The role of all stakeholders must be disclosed in the published program guidelines
for competitive merits-based grants programs, including any who assess or award
grant funding and how advocacy and input from MPs and stakeholders is to be
considered.
• A deadline for the receipt of advocacy letters and stakeholder input should be
advised, after which time such input may not be able to be considered as part of the
assessment process.
2
• Clear recommendations must be made for each individual grant and that the
pooling of ‘eligible’ recommendations for decision-makers to choose from does not
meet this requirement.
• Explicit reference be made to Resource Management Guide 412 so officials are
fully aware and cognisant of this guidance.
• A decision-maker’s approval of funding against the recommendations of agency
officials must be:
clearly recorded, with any refusal or unreasonable delay by decision makers in
o
doing so to be reported to the Minister for Finance at the earliest opportunity; and
reported online, including the basis for that approval. This should preferably be in
o
a central location on GrantConnect or at least on the agency’s website and be
updated within three months of announcements being made.
• Any 'other factors' by which grants will be assessed must be:
transparently listed and published in program design guidelines to enable
o
applicants to address them, and
formally included as part of the assessment criteria and appropriately assessed and
o
scored.
Agreed with qualifications
The Government agrees with the need to strengthen and provide greater clarity in relation to:
the use of merit-based processes (and to document reasons for not using such processes); the
role of various stakeholders in grants administration; the process for making
recommendations; and recording and reporting requirements. The Government will address
the various elements of this recommendation as follows:
Competitive, merit-based processes
The CGRPs include a new key principle for grants administration, ‘Merit-based Processes’.
Officials involved in grants administration must have regard to the key principles
(paragraph 4.4b) and entities must put in place practices and procedures to ensure that grants
administration is conducted in a manner that is consistent with the key principles
(paragraph 6.3).
This new key principle maintains the existing default position that competitive merit-based
selection processes should be used to inform the award of grants unless specifically agreed
otherwise by a minister, accountable authority or delegate. However, noting that there are
instances where non-competitive processes are appropriate, the principle provides that the
rationale for using a different approach to the default should be documented and included in
the grant opportunity guidelines.
Clarifying stakeholder roles
Third parties that undertake grants administration processes on behalf of the Commonwealth
must adhere to the key principles and applicable requirements of the CGRPs and the
published grant opportunity guidelines. The term ‘third party’ is defined in the CGRPs to
include any person or entity involved in the grants administration process who
3
is not a minister, accountable authority or official, including parliamentarians and external
committees.
Consistent with the key principle of ‘Governance and Accountability’, officials must clearly
define the roles of third parties in grants administration (paragraph 14.3), including through
the grant opportunity guidelines, operational guidance and entity procedures. This would
include, for example, explaining the role of parliamentarians and other stakeholders who will
provide advice or recommendations to decision makers (paragraphs 2.10 and 2.11).
Finance will also develop guidance to support entities to consider when it may be appropriate
for other inputs such as advocacy and representations to be considered in grants decision
making, consistent with the key principles of ‘Collaboration and Partnership’ and ‘Probity
and Transparency’.
Recommendations to decision makers and recording and reporting requirements
The CGRPs include new mandatory requirements for strengthened briefing by officials and
decision making, recording and reporting by ministers (paragraphs 4.6 and 4.7). In addition to
the existing requirements under the CGRGs, officials will be required to provide ministers
with clear advice on the merits of grant applications and to indicate which applications can be
supported within the available funding. In addition, officials must recommend that
applications that do not meet any of the selection criteria be rejected. Officials are also
encouraged to make other specific recommendations regarding the grant applications. These
recommendations could, for example, be based on other factors outlined in the grant
opportunity guidelines (paragraph 4.7(d)). The new key principles of ‘Consistency with grant
guidelines and established processes’ makes clear that grant opportunity guidelines should
clearly set out how such factors will be assessed and applied ( paragraph 13.3).
In addition to the existing requirements under the CGRGs, the CGRPs will require ministers
who are the approvers of grants to record the basis for approving grants that officials have
recommended be rejected and the basis for not approving grants which officials have
recommended be approved. Ministers must also record in writing any conflicts of interest
relating to a grant that they approve (paragraph 4.10).
The CGRPs will also require the Minister for Finance to table in each House of Parliament a
copy of reports received from ministers under paragraph 4.11(a) (approval of grants in own
electorate) and 4.12(a) (approval of grants which officials recommended be rejected), as soon
as practicable after the end of each quarter (paragraph 4.13). The decisions by ministers under
paragraphs 4.11 and 4.12 must also be recorded on GrantConnect.
References to guidance
While the CGRPs do not reference specific Resource Management Guides, the CGRPs note
that additional guidance, tools and templates are available on the Finance website
(paragraph 2.12). This approach is appropriate to ensure guidance material can be updated as
required without the need to amend the CGRPs, which is a legislative instrument. The
Department of Finance is providing a range of support for officials to support implementation
4
of the CGRPs and exploring further education opportunities to increase awareness and
understanding of the grants framework and to improve grants administration.
Recommendation 4
2.96 In keeping with the key principles of ‘Governance and Accountability’ and ‘Probity
and Transparency’ in the administration of Commonwealth grants, the Committee
recommends that the Department of Finance develops ‘good practice’ examples of
record-keeping templates with an accompanying checklist that give effect to the rules
and principles of the CGRGs that all Commonwealth entities be strongly encouraged to
use for any grants or ‘grants-like’ programs. These templates and checklists should
prompt both public officials and ministers to clearly document all decisions and
decision-making processes throughout the operation of a grants program. The
following requirements are recommended:
• sample templates and accompanying checklists be developed no later than six
months from the date of this report
• input on template design and accompanying checklists to be sought from the major
Commonwealth entities that operate grants programs, Grants Hubs, and from the
Australian National Audit Office
• all Departments of State and other significant grant-making entities be asked to
advise the Committee within 6 months of the templates and checklists being
finalised how they have now embedded the guidance in their agency’s practices.
Agreed with qualifications
The CGRPs highlight that officials must retain appropriate records, consistent with their
obligations under Part 2-3 of the Public Governance Performance and Accountability Act
2013 and the Archives Act 1963 (see CGRPs, paragraph 3.15). Entities must also ensure that
they have in place appropriate internal policies and processes that are consistent with the
requirements of the CGRPs (paragraph 6.3).
The Department of Finance is developing guidance to support officials to implement the new
CGRPs. This guidance will include appropriate links to the support and guidance provided by
the National Archives of Australia, which sets policy and standards on data management and
record security.
To support consistency across government, the Department of Finance has developed a range
of tools including templates for grant opportunity guidelines and agreements, a checklist for
officials who are briefing ministers and templates to assist ministers to report to the Minister
for Finance on decisions to award grants in their own electorates or against the advice of
officials under paragraphs 4.11 and 4.12. Entities are strongly encouraged to use these
templates and checklists.
5
Recommendation 6
2.128 The Committee recommends that the Australian Government amends the
Commonwealth Grants Rules and Guidelines 2017 and makes any consequential
amendments to other legislation to provide that:
• The Commonwealth Grants Rules and Guidelines will apply to corporate
Commonwealth entities by default unless exceptions are made via legislative
instrument issued by the Minister for Finance.
Agreed with qualifications
Division 6A of Part 2-4 of the PGPA Rule mirrors the existing requirements under the
CGRGs where a minister is involved in the making of a Corporate Commonwealth Entity
(CCE) grant.
Division 6A will be updated to reflect the new obligations applying to ministers under the
CGRPs, which come into effect on 1 October 2024.
Following the implementation of these amendments, Finance will undertake further work, in
consultation with CCEs, to explore whether the remaining elements of the CGRPs should
apply to CCEs, and the appropriate mechanism/s to do so.
Recommendation 7
3.23 The Committee requests that the Department of Finance reports back to it on its
progress in implementing the recommendations of the audit into the grants hubs by the
Australian National Audit Office within 12 months of the date of this report.
Agreed
The Secretary of the Department of Finance wrote to the Chair of the JCPAA on 8 June 2024
providing an update and acquitting this recommendation. A copy of this letter is available on
the JCPAA inquiry website.
6
