Australian Government
Australian Government response to the Senate
Select Committee on the Perth Mint and Commonwealth
regulatory compliance report:
The Perth Mint: Final report
2024
SEPTEMBER
Introduction
On 21 June 2024, the Senate Select Committee on the Perth Mint and Commonwealth
regulatory compliance (the Committee) published a report on the corporate and regulatory
compliance of Gold Corporation and its trading entity, The Pe1ih Mint, with Australia's anti-
money laundering and counter terrorism financing (AML/CTF) regime, as well as related
Commonwealth legislation. The Committee was established by the Senate on 22 June 2023,
and focussed on the events that led to the Australian Transaction Rep01is and Analysis Centre
(AUSTRAC) ordering the appointment of an external auditor to Gold Corporation, the
regulatory compliance of Gold Corporation with Commonwealth legislation, and other
matters concerning the corporate and statutory governance of Gold Corporation.
The report makes recommendations directed at Gold Corporation, which is a Western
Australian government trading enterprise, the Western Australian Government, the Western
Australian Parliament and the Australian Government. Where recommendations are directed
at Gold Corporation or the Western Australian Government, the Government has noted these
as the Commonwealth does not have responsibility for any response to these
recommendations.
The Australian Government thanks the Committee and acknowledges the concerns raised in
the dissenting report. The Australian Government's response to the Committee's
recommendations is detailed below.
2
Recommendation Government Response
Committee Report
1 The committee recommends that the Board of Gold Corporation (trading as The Government notes this recommendation.
The Perth Mint) publicly acknowledge that the failure to comply with the
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006 is the
responsibility of the Board and, in particular, members of the Audit and
Risk Management Committee.
2 The committee recommends that Gold Corporation publish a clear The Government notes this recommendation.
statement identifying the governance failures that ultimately led to breaches
of the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006,
and that the public statement specifically reference:
•
the events that lead to anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism
financing compliance failings identified in the 2020 Internal Audit
Report dated August 2020;
•
the extent to which the Gold Corporation Board informed the
Western Australian Government of failures to comply with the Anti-
Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006;
and
•
the extent to which the Assistant Under Treasurer, Mr Richard
Watson, as a member of the Gold Corporation Board, informed the
Western Australian Government of failings in Gold Corporation's
compliance with the Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-
Terrorism Financing Act 2006.
3 The committee recommends that Gold Corporation table before the The Government notes this recommendation.
Western Australian Parliament the 2020 Internal Audit Report dated
August 2020.
3
Recommendation Government Response
4 The committee recommends that Gold Corporation table before the The Government notes this recommendation.
Western Australian Parliament a report every two months on its compliance
with the Enforceable Undertaking, and that this reporting continues until
one month after the Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre
formally releases Gold Corporation from the Enforceable Undertaking.
5 The committee recommends the Parliament of Western Australia initiate its The Government notes this recommendation.
own inquiry into matters related to the decision by the Australian
Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre to impose an Enforceable
Undertaking over Gold Corporation, post 30 April 2025.
6 The committee recommends the Western Australian Government detail to The Government notes this recommendation.
the Western Australian Parliament the extent of the potential financial
liability to the Western Australian taxpayer if Gold Corporation fails to
meet its obligations under the Enforceable Undertaking.
7 The committee recommends that the Australian Transaction Reports and The Government does not agree to this recommendation.
Analysis Centre (AUST RAC) provide a private briefing eve two months
ry
The Government notes there are existing mechanisms for
to the Senators ofthis committee on the progress being made by Gold
the Parliament to obtain updates from AUS TRAC.
Corporation to implement the recommendations of the Enforceable
Further, as the Select Committee concluded its inqui on
ry
Undertaking.
21 June 2024, it would not be appropriate for AUSTRAC
to report to individual Senators who do not have statutory
Should concerns be identified through these briefings, the committee
responsibility for the agency.
recommends a further public examination be conducted through a referral
to the Senate Legal and Constitutional References Committee for extended AUSTRAC, as an independent statutory authority,
inqui and report on matters related to the corporate and regulatory manages transparency in a way that maintains due
ry
process and operational integrity, especially while
undertaking an ongoing investigation.
4
Recommendation Government Response
compliance of Gold Corporation with Commonwealth legislation, with
particular reference to: When AUSTRAC enters enforceable undertakings, it
publishes advice of the commencement and terms of
• those undertakings. AUSTRAC only redacts sensitive
current and historical compliance with Australian anti-money
material it considers may compromise the reporting
laundering regulatory requirements, specifically the Anti-Money
entities' AML/CTF systems and controls.
Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006 and the
Anti-Money Laundering and Counter-Terrorism Financing Rules
AUSTRAC also announces on its website when it is
Instrument 2007 (No. l); satisfied that the requirements of the enforceable
•
events that led to the Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis undertaking have been met. If the terms of the
Centre ordering the appointment of an external auditor to Gold undertaking are not ultimately met, AUSTRAC will
publicise what action it decides to take.
Corporation under subsection 162(2) of the Anti-Money Laundering
and Counter-Terrorism Financing Act 2006;
Progress of AUSTRAC's various undertakings can be
•
matters concerning the corporate and statutory governance of Gold
monitored at htms://www.austrac.gov.au/lists-
Corporation; enforcement-actions-taken.
•
the potential financial liability to Western Australian taxpayers of
failure to comply with the Enforceable Undertaking; and
•
any other related matters .
8
The committee recommends that the Australian National Audit Office The Government notes this recommendation.
(ANAO) conducts an inquiry into the adequacy of the Australian
As an independent officer of the Parliament, the ANAO
Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre's oversight of anti-money
will provide a response to this recommendation directly
laundering and counter-terrorism financing compliance by medium to high-
to the Select Committee on the Perth Mint and
risk entities.
Commonwealth regulatory compliance.
9
The committee recommends any continuance of the Senate's inquiry into The Government does not agree to this recommendation,
matters related to the corporate and regulatory compliance of Gold noting the Select Committee concluded its inquiry on 21
June 2024.
Corporation and its trading entity The Perth Mint, through the Senate Legal
5
Recommendation Government Response
and Constitutional Affairs References Committee, hears evidence from the
following witnesses:
•
the Hon Mr David Michael MLA, Western Australian Minister for
Mines and Petroleum;
•
Ms Gaye McMath, Chair of Audit and Risk Management
Committee (1 July 2016-30 June 2019);
•
Mr John O'Connor, Chair of Audit and Risk Management
Committee (1 July 2019-present);
•
Mr Richard Watson, Assistant Under Treasurer, Western Australian
Treasury (February 2019-present) , Board Director ex-officio, and
Audit and Risk Management Committee member (2018-present);
•
Ms Kaylene Gulich, Audit and Risk Management Committee
member (2016-2018);
•
Mr Mark Puzey, Audit and Risk Management Committee member
(2018- 2021);
•
other members of the Audit and Risk Management Committee from
2021 onwards; and
•
representatives of PwC, or any other external auditor, who
participated or oversaw any audit work contracted by Gold
Corporation in the period 2010 to 2021.
10 The committee recommends that, consistent with the Enforceable The Government notes this recommendation.
Undertaking's acknowledgement that the Australian Transaction Reports
Consistent with the terms of the enforceable undertaking,
and Analysis Centre (AUSTRAC) may from 'time to time publicly refer to
AUSTRAC, as an independent statutory authority, may
this Enforceable Undertaking', AUS TRAC issues a statement (o r
provide information where it will not adversely affect
statements) of progress that detail:
AUSTRAC's ongoing investigations. Decisions to
6
Recommendation Government Response
•
the tracking of activities regarding the completion of the provide information on enforceable undertakings are a
Remediation Program; matter for AUSTRAC.
•
the remediation of customer data in accordance with the timeframes
and standards detailed in the Customer Data Remediation work
stream;
•
the completion of any actions in the Customer Data Remediation
workstream;
•
advice of any deviations to the actions or timeframes set out in the
Remediation Program requested by Gold Corporation;
•
any permissions given by AUS TRAC for material deviations to the
Remediation Program;
•
any failure to meet reporting requirements required in the
Enforceable Undertaking; - any breach of the Remediation Program
advised to AUSTRAC; and
•
any other matters relevant to informing the Western Australian
community about the level of risk, or efforts to mitigate against
risks, of money laundering and the financing of counterterrorism by
Gold Corporation or its trading entity, The Perth Mint.
7
