OFFICIAL
Australian Government Response to the
Community Affairs References Committee report:
Inquiry into the purpose,
intent and adequacy of the
Disability Support
Pension
October 2024
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Acknowledgement
The Australian Government would like to thank the Community Affairs References
Committee (the Committee) for its report into the purpose, intent and adequacy of the
Disability Support Pension. The Government also thanks those individuals and organisations
who have contributed to the Inquiry.
Introduction
On 13 May 2021, the Senate referred an inquiry into the purpose, intent and adequacy of the
Disability Support Pension (DSP) to the Senate Community Affairs References Committee
for inquiry and report.
The Committee received 134 submissions and held four public hearings between
September and November 2021. The Department of Social Services, Services Australia, the
National Disability Insurance Agency, the Department of Education, Skills and Employment,
the Australian National Audit Office, the Australian Human Rights Commission, and the
Office of the Commonwealth Ombudsman appeared at hearings of the Inquiry.
Response
The Government is committed to providing a strong safety net for people with disability who
are unable to work through the Disability Support Pension.
Pensions, including the Disability Support Pension, are generally paid at the highest legislated
rate of income support in the Australian social security system. Disability Support Pension is
indexed twice a year in March and September to the higher of the increase in the Consumer
Price Index and the increase in the Pensioner and Beneficiary Living Cost Index. The
Pensioner and Beneficiary Living Cost Index basket of goods and services is weighted to
recognise that pensioners spend more of their income on essentials. Pensioners can also
receive a range of concessions including assistance for people who rent in the private rental
market, subsidised prescription medicines, and subsidised health care and related products.
The Government continues to work to better support people with disability who are unable to
work. On 1 April 2023, the Social Security (Tables for the Assessment of Work-related
Impairment for Disability Support Pension) Determination 2023 (the Impairment Tables)
came into effect, replacing the previous Impairment Tables. The updated Impairment Tables
are a result of a comprehensive review of the legislative instrument, including extensive
stakeholder consultation with disability peak bodies and advocacy groups, medical
professionals and people with lived experience of the DSP process. The revised Impairment
tables addressed a number of recommendations made by the Committee in their report.
2
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
The Government has also established a range of mechanisms to support vulnerable
Australians, including the Economic Inclusion Advisory Committee, which provides advice
ahead of every Budget on ways to boost economic inclusion and tackle disadvantage. The
Committee will look at options to reduce barriers and disincentives to work, including in
relation to social security and employment services. It will also explore options for tailored
responses to address barriers to economic inclusion for long-term unemployed and
disadvantaged groups, including place-based approaches at the local level.
The Government will continue to work toward creating a more inclusive society and
improving the lives of people with disability in Australia, in line with its commitments under
Australia’s Disability Strategy 2021–2031.
Recommendations made by the Committee
No Recommendation
The committee recommends that the Australian Government investigates how the
requirement that a condition be ‘fully diagnosed, treated and stabilised’ is
1 preventing people with conditions that are complex, fluctuating, or deteriorate over
time, from accessing the Disability Support Pension, and could be modified to
ensure people get the support they need.
The committee recommends that the Australian Government considers reforming
the approach taken to determine whether a claimant has a ‘severe impairment’,
2
so as to allow the accumulation of 20 points across any number of impairment tables
to meet the definition of a severe impairment.
The committee recommends that the Australian Government undertake an in-depth,
3 clinical review of the impairment tables in totality, that recognises comorbidity and
draws on the lived experience of people with disability; with a view to working
towards a social model of disability.
The committee recommends that the Australian Government introduces a discretion
4
which would allow for Disability Support Pension claims to be approved if medical
eligibility is established after the existing 13-week qualification period.
5 The committee recommends that the Australian Government considers revising the
evidentiary requirements to allow evidence provided by registered psychologists.
The committee recommends that the Department of Social Services and Services
6 Australia work with Aboriginal community controlled health organisations to
review the claims process and evidentiary requirements for First Nations claimants
to ensure that the process is culturally safe.
The committee recommends that the Australian Government consider reintroducing
the treating doctors report, with wide consultation on how best to provide targeted
7
resources to support general practitioners, specialists, and psychologists to identify,
compile, and summarise evidence relevant to a patient’s Disability Support Pension
claim or appeal.
3
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
The committee recommends that the Australian Government considers ensuring that
8
the Medicare Benefits Schedule allows health practitioners to claim payment for
providing evidence in support of Disability Support Pension claims.
The committee recommends that the Australian Government reviews the medical
evidentiary requirements for claimants of the Disability Support Pension, to ensure
9 that the application is fully accessible. The committee envisages that such a review
would consider the specific challenges faced by individuals located in regional,
rural, and remote Australia; recipients of JobSeeker and Youth Allowance; recent
migrants; and First Nations people.
The committee recommends that Services Australia, in consultation with key
10 stakeholders, reviews all guidance material, publicly available information, and the
claim form, with the aim of making them simpler, clearer, and genuinely accessible
for claimants and those who support them.
The committee recommends that Services Australia improves the level of
information provided to Disability Support Pension claimants when it rejects their
claims.
11
The committee envisages that such information would, amongst other things, clearly
and comprehensively explain why a claim was rejected and, if relevant, provide
guidance on specific evidentiary requirements, as well as detailed information on
the review process.
The committee recommends that Services Australia ensures all of its clients who are
12
deaf or hearing-impaired have the option of accessing an Auslan interpreter, either
in-person or remotely, to make sure the application process is accessible.
The committee recommends that Services Australia enhances the visual and/or
13
tactile cues available in its service centres to assist people who are deaf or hearing-
impaired.
The committee recommends that the Australian Government undertakes a review of
14
all Services Australia service centres to ensure genuine accessibility.
The committee recommends that the Australian Government provides additional
15
funding to advocacy groups and community legal services to support Disability
Support Pension claimants.
The committee recommends that the Australian Government remove JobSeeker
16
mutual obligation requirements for Disability Support Pension claimants while their
claims are being assessed.
The committee recommends that the Australian Government increases funding for
17 First Nation’s advocacy services and Aboriginal community controlled health
organisations to allow these organisations to better support their clients through the
Disability Support Pension claims process.
The committee recommends that the Australian Government ensures the
18
recommendations of the Commonwealth Ombudsman’s 2016 report on access to the
DSP are implemented in full.
4
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
The committee recommends that the Department of Social Services no longer
19
cancels the Disability Support Pension for recipients who are in custody for more
than two years.
The committee recommends that Services Australia consults with carers and
20
representative organisations in order to provide additional support for carers with
disability who are claiming the Disability Support Pension.
The committee recommends that the Department of Social Services and Services
Australia, in consultation with key stakeholders, reform the Disability Support
21
Pension to ensure that it is responsive to claimants who are experiencing, or are at
risk of experiencing, family and domestic violence, and that it meets their specific
needs and requirements.
The committee recommends that the Australian Government considers reforming
the income test for recipients of the Disability Support Pension to better support
individuals facing structural barriers to participating in the workforce, and to better
22 recognise the fluctuating nature of a person’s ability to participate in paid
employment due to their impairment.
The committee envisages that such reforms could, amongst other things, raise the
income thresholds at which the Disability Support Pension payment is reduced, and
lower the rate which it is reduced once this threshold is reached.
The committee recommends that the Department of Social Services reviews the
23 program of support requirement and considers making participation in an
employment services program voluntary for all Disability Support Pension
claimants.
The committee recommends that the Department of Social Services and Services
Australia improve the visibility of, and information on, the program of support
24
requirement for all claimants. Amongst other things, such improvements would
ensure that relevant information is provided to all claimants at the beginning of the
claims process.
The committee recommends that the Australian Government abandon punitive
compliance measures and ensures that the employment services system provides
25
genuine support to disabled job seekers with complex needs, including focusing on
providing personalised support and skills development as well as effectively
engaging prospective employers.
The committee recommends that the Australian Government continues to extend
across Australia approaches that are voluntary and provide appropriate support,
such as the Individual Placement and Support Model. The Government should also
consider the feasibility and effectiveness of other approaches, such as providing
26
peer support workers, work experience opportunities, and school-to-work programs,
in improving employment outcomes for people with disability by providing
well-supported, voluntary programs.
5
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
The committee recommends that the Australian Government investigates ways to
27 better support people on the Disability Support Pension who are at risk of
poverty— particularly those in the private rental market—and ensures people can
participate in their communities and cover their living costs.
The committee recommends that the Australian Government, in consultation with
28 state and territory governments, improves the coordination and integration of
support payments, programs, and schemes for people with disability across all levels
of government.
The committee recommends that the Australian Government undertakes
29
consultation and evaluation of the Disability Support Pension to align it more
closely with the social model of disability.
The committee recommends that the Australian Government establishes principles
in the administration of social security, including:
30 • proactively assisting people to access support for which they are eligible;
• treating people with respect; and
• making adjustments to service delivery on an individual basis to meet
people’s needs and ensure equal access to social security for all.
Noted
The Government notes these recommendations. However, given the passage of time since the
report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.
6
OFFICIAL
