Australian Government response to the
Community Affairs References Committee report:
Inquiry into adequacy of Newstart and related payments and alternative mechanisms to
determine the level of income support payments in Australia.
September 2024
Introduction
The Australian Government notes the Community Affairs References Committee (the
Committee’s) report to the Inquiry into adequacy of Newstart and related payments and
alternative mechanisms to determine the level of income support payments in Australia.
On 30 April 2020, the Committee released its report into its inquiry into the adequacy of
Newstart and related payments and alternative mechanisms to determine the level of income
support payments in Australia. The inquiry began in July 2019, received 471 submissions in
total, and held 8 public hearings.
The report contained 27 recommendations across a number of portfolios with a focus
on improving the welfare of individuals on Newstart Allowance. The Government notes the
27 recommendations in the report which include, among others, recommendations about: the
adequacy of social security payments; a definition of poverty; further reviews of the social
security system; service delivery and vulnerable people; mutual obligations; introduction of an
independent advisory body; as well as recommendations for the Senate.
The former government did not respond to the report.
4 years have lapsed since the report was tabled. A number of recommendations have been
addressed through a range of measures that have been implemented to ensure job seekers have
the best opportunity to secure employment.
On 20 March 2020, JobSeeker Payment replaced Newstart Allowance and 6 other payments
and became the main unemployment payment in Australia.
In the 2024-25 Budget, the Government has invested around $2 billion to provide more support
in the social safety net. The Government:
• Increased the maximum rates of Commonwealth Rent Assistance by a further 10 per
cent to help relieve rental cost pressures for recipient households. This represents an
investment of $1.9 billion over five years from 2023-24 and builds on the Government’s
15 per cent increase to Commonwealth Rent Assistance maximum rates in the last
Budget. These are the first back-to-back increases in rent assistance in over 30 years.
• Extended the higher rate of JobSeeker Payment and Energy Supplement to single
recipients with an assessed partial capacity to work of less than 15 hours per week so
that those with barriers to employment who have limited or no capacity to work due to
their condition receive an additional $71.20 a fortnight.
• Changing the 25 hour per week work limit to 100 hours over a 4 week settlement period
and removing the restrictions on study, volunteering and travel to work for Carer
Payment, commencing from 20 March 2025.
• Extended the two year freeze of social security deeming rates for a further 12 months to
30 June 2025 to provide continued relief for around 876,000 income support recipients.
The 2024-25 Budget income support measures build on the 2023-24 Budget measures, which
included increases to working age and student payments by at least $40 per fortnight, increases
to Commonwealth Rent Assistance maximum rates by 15 per cent, and the expansion of
eligibility to Parenting Payment Single to single parents with a youngest child under 14 years.
Combined with indexation that was applied on 20 September 2023, the 2023-24 increase to the
base rate of JobSeeker Payment represented the biggest ever nominal increase in the primary
adult unemployment payment rate.
With these increases and indexation, since May 2022, the base rate of JobSeeker Payment
increased from $642.70 to $778.00 per fortnight. This is an increase of $135.30 a fortnight, or
2
21.1 per cent, providing over $3,500 in additional support each year.
Together, the 2024-25 and 2023-24 Budget income support measures, represent an additional
$11.5 billion investment in the social safety net.
The Government notes the Committee’s recommendation to set a national definition of poverty
and to undertake a review of the income support system, including reviews into the rates
of different payments and supplements and the establishment of a Social Security System
Expert Group, tasked with reviewing the social security system.
The Government has committed to consider the rates of income support payments, including
JobSeeker Payment, at every Budget update.
The Government has also established the Economic Inclusion Advisory Committee, to provide
advice on economic inclusion, including policy settings, systems and structures, and the
adequacy, effectiveness and sustainability of income support payments ahead of every Federal
Budget.
The Government notes the report’s recommendations about service delivery and vulnerable
people. The Government, through Services Australia, provides a range of specialist services
and supports to assist disadvantaged and vulnerable people, including vulnerable young people
and people affected by family and domestic violence.
Supporting people affected by family and domestic violence is a priority for
Services Australia’s social work service. Social workers provide professional intervention with
family and domestic violence referrals given high priority to enable a timely service. Social
workers provide: counselling; crisis intervention; referrals; and specific payment related
assistance, including Crisis Payment and Child Support exemptions due to family and domestic
violence.
The Government notes recommendations relating to employment services including further
reviews of employment services and mutual obligation requirements. On 4 July 2022,
Workforce Australia replaced jobactive as the new mainstream employment service.
In August 2022, the House of Representative’s Select Committee into Workforce
Australia was established to inquire into and report on matters related to Workforce Australia
Employment Services. The Committee tabled its final report on 30 November 2023.
In September 2022, the Government held its Jobs and Skills Summit, bringing together unions
and civil society to start a national conversation about a shared vision for Australia’s labour
market.
Building on the foundations of the Summit, Working Future: The Australian Government’s
White Paper on Jobs and Opportunities was released on 25 September 2023. Its objectives are
to deliver sustained and inclusive full employment, promote job security and strong, sustainable
wage growth, reignite productivity growth, fill skills needs, build our future workforce and
overcome barriers to employment and broaden opportunity.
It included two immediate actions in the social service portfolio, to permanently enhance the
pension work bonus and to extend the employment income nil rate period for those on income
support. These measures commenced on 1 January 2024 and 1 July 2024 respectively.
These processes and measures reflect the Government’s commitment to listen to the views of
the community and stakeholders, and continue its positive agenda to boost economic inclusion
and tackle disadvantage.
The Government thanks the individuals and organisations who contributed to the Inquiry.
3
Inquiry into the Adequacy of Newstart and related payments and
alternative mechanisms to determine the level of income support payments
in Australia
Recommendations made by the Committee
No Recommendation
The Committee recommends the Australian Government set a national definition of
1 poverty. The Government should immediately commence work in collaboration
with academic experts and the community sector to determine this definition.
The Committee recommends the Australian Government immediately undertake a
2 review of the income support system to ensure that all eligible income support
recipients do not live in poverty.
The Committee recommends the Australian Government undertake a review of the
adequacy of the Commonwealth Rent Assistance program, to ensure it significantly
3
improves rental affordability and reflects fluctuations in rents and local rental
market circumstances.
The Committee recommends the Australian Government work with state and
4 territory governments to ensure immediate increases in funding for emergency relief
housing and social housing.
The Committee recommends the Australian Government introduce measures to
5 further reduce out-of-pocket medical costs for low-income earners and income
support recipients.
The Committee recommends the Senate consider referring to the Community
6
Affairs References Committee an inquiry into health inequality in Australia.
The Committee recommends the Senate consider referring to the Community
7
Affairs References Committee an inquiry into provision of dental care in Australia.
The Committee recommends the Department of Social Services immediately
improve the level of and access to the supports available through Centrelink services
to victims of domestic and family violence, including:
• the Crisis Payment eligibility criteria, including the number of times an
individual can apply for the Crisis Payment;
8 • the rates of payments;
• the adequacy of Centrelink rules and practices to establish the relationship
status of a social security applicant;
• the delays in accessing payments; and
• the availability of trained and specialised staff operating in Centrelink
offices to support victims of domestic and family violence.
The Committee recommends the Australian Government immediately undertake a
review of Austudy and ABSTUDY to examine:
9
• the adequacy of the eligibility criteria;
• the appropriateness of the application process and timeliness of decisions;
4
No Recommendation
and
• determine rates of payments that ensure people do not live in poverty.
The Committee recommends the Australian Government commission in 2021 an
10
independent review of the student income support system and its administration.
The Committee recommends the Productivity Commission consider undertaking a
study of the economic impacts of the income support payment policies on the not-
11
for-profit sector; other federal government agencies; state, territory and local
governments; and local economies.
The Committee recommends the Australian Government immediately review the
12 earnings threshold of income support payments to ensure it does not impede
jobseekers transitioning to work.
The Committee recommends the Senate consider referring to the Community
Affairs References Committee an inquiry into the mutual obligation requirements
13
for working-age income support recipients and the adequacy and effectiveness of
employment programs.
The Committee recommends the Department of Social Services and the Department
of Education, Skills and Employment urgently undertake, in collaboration with
stakeholders, an evaluation of the current employment services with a view to
ensuring:
• There is adequate capacity to meet the significant increase in demand for
14
their services.
• That employment programs move to a strength based, individualised
approach that better meets the needs of all jobseekers.
• That employment services are not responsible for any compliance
implementation.
The Committee recommends the Department of Social Services urgently undertake
the review of the Impairment Tables that will expire in 2022 and ensure that people
15
with disability or a medical condition who cannot work receive fit-for-purpose
support.
The Committee recommends the Department of Social Services immediately
undertake a review of mutual obligations requirements in relation to job search
16
activities for people who are unable to work due to a medical condition or a
disability.
The Committee recommends the Australian Government work with employer
17
groups to reduce the social, economic and budget costs of age discrimination.
The Committee recommends the Senate consider referring to the Education and
18 Employment References Committee an inquiry into age discrimination in
employment.
The Committee recommends the current Retirement Income Review examine as
19
part of its review, the adequacy of the JobSeeker payment and its impact on the Age
5
No Recommendation
Pension system and budget, with reference to:
• early access to superannuation due to financial hardship experienced by
unemployed income support recipients over 55; and
• the impact of means testing and the liquid assets waiting period on the
retirement savings of unemployed people applying to the JobSeeker
Payment.
The Committee recommends the Australian Government immediately review the
adequacy of the Parenting Payment (Single) and Family Tax Benefit —Part B to
ensure:
20 • eligible single parents receive adequate support to meet the additional costs
of raising a child until the child leaves the secondary school system; and
• that the total of income support payments an eligible applicant can receive
does not allow the applicant to live in poverty.
The Committee recommends the Australian Government review the adequacy of the
Remote Area Allowance with the view to:
• set an adequate rate of payment to address the higher costs of living in
21
remote Australia; and
• set a remote-area measure of inflation to be used to index the payment
annually
The Committee recommends the National Indigenous Australians Agency
commission a study into the prevalence, causes and consequences of First Nations
22
Peoples living in remote communities not taking up or dropping out of the social
security system.
The Committee recommends the Department of Social Services undertake a review
23 of the adequacy of the Youth Allowance policy criteria and rates of payment to
ensure recipients do not live in poverty.
The Committee recommends Services Australia ensure that vulnerable young people
are systematically assigned a caseworker to assist them with their applications for
24
income support payments and connect them with the relevant services that can
provide further assistance.
The Committee recommends the Australian Government establish a Social Security
System Expert Group led by independent experts charged with periodically
25
examining the adequacy of the social security system and reporting to Parliament to
ensure the Australian Government meets its responsibilities.
The Committee recommends that the Social Security System Expert Group is tasked
with a review of the social security system to advise Parliament on how to reform
the system to achieve better outcomes and increase economic participation. Such a
26 review would provide advice to Parliament on the following matters:
• establishing an appropriate mechanism to establish payment rates for
allowances, pensions and supplements;
• determining an appropriate benchmark for the indexation of all income
6
No Recommendation
support payment rates;
• ensuring payments and allowances reflect people's circumstances and needs;
• adopting effective models to support people into work;
• providing additional support and measures to address entrenched
disadvantage and long-term unemployment; and
• addressing any other related matters identified by the Social Security System
Expert Group.
The Committee recommends that once the Coronavirus Supplement is phased out,
27 the Australian Government increase the JobSeeker Payment, Youth Allowance and
Parenting Payment rates to ensure that all eligible recipients do not live in poverty.
Noted
The Government notes these recommendations. However, given the passage of time since this
report was tabled, a substantive Government response it no longer appropriate.
7
