Australian Government response to the Senate Community
Affairs References Committee report:
Administration of registration and notification by the
Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency and related
entities under the Health Practitioner Regulation
National Law.
SEPTEMBER 2024
Response to the recommendations
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation. However, given the passage of time since this
report was tabled, in April 2022, a substantive Government response is no longer
appropriate.
A number of reviews of the National Registration and Accreditation Scheme and reforms
have occurred since this time which respond to the concerns raised by Senate Committee.
These include:
• Reforms to cosmetic surgery, including title protection of the term surgeon
https://www.health.gov.au/our-work/cosmetic-surgery-reforms.
• The Independent review of Australia’s regulatory settings relating to overseas health
practitioners (Kruk Review) which was endorsed by National Cabinet in December 2023
with implementation of health recommendations due for completion by July 2025.
• The Independent review of the regulation of podiatric surgeons
https://www.podiatryboard.gov.au/News/Independent-review-for-podiatric-
surgeons.aspx. Ahpra will engage with Health Ministers on the outcomes of this review
in late 2024.
• Health Ministers commissioned an Independent review of the regulatory complexity of
the National Registration and Accreditation Scheme (Complexity Review) which is
currently underway with a final report expected in April 2025. This review will consider
issues including
o Consistency in decision making across complaints and notifications processes
o Stewardship of the National Scheme including the regulatory principles that govern
the National Scheme
o Expansion of the National Scheme to include other allied health professions
o Oversight by health ministers of accreditation activities which are delivered by
entitles not specifically mentioned in the National Law.
• Ahpra has also issued a Blueprint to enable a proactive approach to professional
boundaries and professional sexual misconduct https://www.ahpra.gov.au/News/2023-
02-14-reform-blueprint.aspx.
The above reforms are either currently being implemented or will be discussed by Health
Minister in the coming year. Pending Health Ministers’ consideration of the above reforms,
further analysis will be undertake to determine if there are any outstanding actions.
