Australian Government

Australian Government response to the
Senate Environment and Communications References Committee
Interim Report:

Australia’s extinction crisis

October 2024

Introduction

The Environment and Communications Reference Committee began the inquiry into
Australia’s extinction crisis on 27 June 2018 under the previous inquiry name ‘Australia’s
faunal extinction crisis’. The May 2024 interim report of the Committee on Australia’s
extinction crisis focuses on the Australian Government’s reform’s to the Environment
Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act).

Response

Recommendation 1

The committee recommends that the Australian Government urgently and unequivocally
commit to publicly releasing exposure draft legislation of the full package of reforms to the
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 for consultation ahead of
passage of piecemeal legislation in the Parliament.

Recommendation 2

The committee recommends that the Australian Government commit to a timeframe for
the introduction into the Parliament of the full package of Environmental Protection and
Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 reforms as outlined in the Nature Positive Plan. This
timeframe should allow a reasonable period for all necessary legislation to be passed
before the end of the 47th Parliament.

Recommendation 3

The committee recommends that the timeframe in recommendation 2 be published by the
Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water on its EPBC Act
reform webpage.

Response to all
NOTED

The Australian Government's Nature Positive environmental law reforms are being
progressed in 3 stages:

e The first stage established the Nature Repair market and expanded the water trigger.

e Stage 2 establishes Environment Protection Australia (EPA) and the Head of
Environment Information Australia (EIA).

e The third stage of reform will compete the environmental law reforms as outlined in
the Nature Positive Plan.

The first stage of the reforms was completed in December 2023. Legislation to implement
the second stage of the reforms was introduced into Parliament on 28 May 2024.

The third stage of environmental law reforms will include release of a comprehensive
exposure draft of the new laws for public consultation before their introduction to Parliament.

Dissenting recommendations from the Australian Greens

Dissenting recommendation 1

Introduce a full package of environment laws to this Parliament that end native forest
logging and ensure new coal and gas projects are properly assessed for their climate
impacts to stop the expansion of further fossil fuels.

Dissenting recommendation 2

Commit to a timeframe for an exposure draft of standalone First Nations cultural heritage
legislation and full implementation of Chapter 2 of the Samuel Review.

Response to all
NOTED

The Australian Government's Nature Positive environmental law reforms as set out in the
Nature Positive Plan: better for the environment, better for business, also address both
Regional Forest Agreements and development assessment and approval processes.

The government is committed to strengthening protections for First Nations cultural heritage
and is working in partnership with the First Nations Heritage Protection Alliance to co-design
a reform framework.

