Australian Government response to the
Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee report:
Impact of changes to service delivery models on the administration
and running of Government programs.
OCTOBER 2024
Introduction
The Government welcomes the opportunity to respond to the Senate Legal and Constitutional
Affairs References Committee’s report titled Impact of changes to service delivery models on
the administration and running of Government programs (the Report).
The Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee tabled the Report in
February 2020 following an inquiry that included public submissions and a public hearing
that was held in Canberra.
The Report and its seven recommendations covers a broad range of issues including different
models for delivering government services, staffing levels in the Australian Public Service,
automation in the delivery of services, and specific procurements for government services.
The Government recognises the importance of this report and its recommendations, and
supports, or notes, the seven recommendations.
As noted in the Government’s Response to the report of the Royal Commission into the
Robodebt Scheme, the Government will consider opportunities to progress legislative
reforms to ensure that government decisions involving automation are made under a
consistent legal framework which is clear and transparent, while harnessing the speed, cost
and efficiency benefits of technological advances in artificial intelligence (AI) and
automation. Noting the links between the use of automated decision-making and AI, the
implementation of these recommendations will be informed by the Government’s broader
work on the safe and responsible use of AI.
Further to this, the Government is also committed to growing capability within the public
service, ensuring that there is internal capacity to deliver a range of services to the Australian
public. Additionally, where services are outsourced, the Government is committed to
ensuring accountability and transparency in its procurement activities. This commitment is
reflected in the 2023-24 Budget with funds allocated to update AusTender, the
Commonwealth’s publicly available e-procurement information system, to allow further
transparency in the procurement process in addition to existing reporting requirements.
The Government provides the following response to the Committee’s recommendations.
2
Response to Recommendations
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the Australian government assess all current and future
proposals for outsourcing government services against a ‘public interest test’, which
includes flow-on economic and employment impacts. Results of the public interest test,
along with a comprehensive business case, must be made publicly-available in a timely
fashion.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
Alternative delivery methods for Government programs and/or services, and their associated
costs and benefits, are considered as part of established budget processes. Through the
development of New Policy Proposals and submissions to Government, entities work with
central agencies to develop policies, including consideration of the most appropriate delivery
model. The development and consideration of budget proposals is underpinned by delivering
the most efficient, effective, economical and ethical way to achieve maximum economic
benefit for Australians.
The Government recognises the importance of considering the benefit of procurements to the
Australian economy. As such, the Commonwealth Procurement Rules already require
officials to consider the economic benefit of a procurement to the Australian economy for
significant procurements. This can include considerations around the employment of workers
in Australia, the contribution to positive social outcomes in Australian communities, sharing
knowledge, skills and technology with small and medium enterprises, or the development and
adoption of innovative products or practices that benefit Australian communities.
Requiring an additional public interest test, that includes flow-on economic and employment
impacts, would duplicate existing considerations in the Budget and procurement processes
and place additional burdens on businesses engaging in Commonwealth procurements.
3
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that the Australian government provide a commitment that
services dealing with complex cases and vulnerable people should not generally be
considered suitable for outsourcing.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government is committed to ensuring that our most vulnerable community members and
those with complex needs have access to the support they need at the time they need it.
This support may include outsourced services that provide the Government with specialist
skills and resources that may not be able to be provided from within the Australian Public
Service, at a particular time or to the scale required. This may include cultural and technical
skills, as well as knowledge of local communities. Outsourced services may also allow the
Government to respond rapidly to developing situations and needs, including situations that
may be time limited and not ongoing.
The Government is committed to ensuring the Australian Public Service has the capability to
deal with complex cases and vulnerable people in a fair and equitable manner, including by
ensuring those delivering the services possess the necessary skills and resources.
4
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the Australian government, in consultation with relevant
stakeholders, implement arrangements to make outsourcing contracts publicly available,
unless there are published national security concerns.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government is committed to ensuring accountability and transparency in its procurement
and contracting activities. The Commonwealth Procurement Rules provide existing
requirements for relevant contracts to be reported on AusTender, the publicly available whole
of government procurement information system. In addition, information on procurement
contracts is reported in entities’ annual reports and through the Murray Motion.
Existing contractual reporting obligations recognise the importance of maintaining
confidentiality, including commercial confidentiality, of certain information, and the need to
balance this against public accountability and transparency requirements.
In a further demonstration of its commitment to transparency, the Government announced in
the 2023-24 Budget (Buy Australian Plan1) that it is making further enhancements to
AusTender. As part of these improvements, procuring officials will be required to publicly
report their justification for exercising contract variations or extensions, and further
information will be required to be publicly reported regarding the procurement process, such
as reporting the number of suppliers invited to participate (including when procurements have
utilised a panel arrangement).
1 Page 111, Budget Paper No. 2: Budget Measures (https://budget.gov.au/content/bp2/download/bp2_2023-
24.pdf)
5
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the Commonwealth public service Average Staffing
Level (ASL) cap be lifted immediately.
Response: The Government supports this recommendation.
Consistent with its election commitment, the Government removed the ASL cap across all
government agencies in June 2022.
6
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends that the Australian government ensure any further projects
that involve automated decision-making are not pursued if automation reduces service
quality, impacts upon fairness, or reduces equity of access.
Response: The Government supports the recommendation.
In the right areas and with appropriate management, automated systems can provide benefits
that improve service quality, such as real-time notification that claims contain insufficient
information, and faster overall claims processing. They also deliver business benefits such as
improved consistency, accuracy and transparency of administrative decision making. The AI
in Government Taskforce under the future of work sub-committee is working on whole-of-
government AI application, policies, standards and guidance to help the Australian Public
Service to engage with and deploy AI in a way that is safe, ethical and responsible.
The Government is committed to ensuring technologies like automated decision-making are
integrated in a safe and responsible manner. The Government considers that ethical
considerations and principles of administrative law must be taken into account in the design
of automated decision-making processes and there needs to be proper oversight of these
arrangements.
The Commonwealth Ombudsman’s automated decision-making better practice guide
provides a practical tool for agencies implementing new automated systems. This guide
emphasises that Australian Government agencies must ensure their automated systems
comply with administrative law principles of legality, fairness, rationality and transparency,
as well as privacy requirements and human rights obligations.
In its Response to the report of the Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme, the
Government has committed to consider opportunities for legislative reform to introduce a
consistent legal framework in which automation in government services can operate ethically,
without bias and with appropriate safeguards. This will include consideration of review
pathways for those affected by decisions, and transparency about the use of automated
decision-making and how such decision-making processes operate, for persons affected by
decisions, and to enable independent scrutiny.
The Government has also committed to ensuring there is appropriate oversight of the use of
automation in service delivery. This includes oversight of technical aspects to identify
potential bias and ensure the use of automated decision-making or AI is ethical and in
accordance with legislative protections. In implementing its Response to the report of the
Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme, the Government will consider establishing a
body, or expanding the functions of an existing body, with the power to monitor and audit
automated decision-making processes. Noting the links between the use of automated
decision-making and AI, the implementation of these recommendations will be informed by
the Government’s broader work on the safe and responsible use of AI.
7
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends that Commonwealth departments and agencies have regard
to the Commonwealth Ombudsman’s guidance on best-practice in automation at the
earliest stages of any relevant project.
Response: The Government supports the recommendation.
As mentioned in the Governments response to Recommendation 5 of this report, in
implementing its Response to the report of the Royal Commission into the Robodebt Scheme,
the Government will consider establishing a body, or expanding the functions of an existing
body, with the power to monitor and audit automated decision-making processes, further
supporting best-practice considerations regarding automation in government projects. The
implementation of these recommendations will be informed by the Government’s broader
work on the safe and responsible use of AI.
8
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends that the Australian Government does not proceed with the
Request for Tender (RFT) Delivering Visa Services for Australia - Global Digital
Platform, and seeks instead to fund and deliver an in-house solution.
Response: The Government notes this recommendation.
The Global Digital Platform (GDP) Request for Tender (RFT) was terminated as a result of a
change in the former Government's policy on 20 March 2020.
On 11 December 2023, the Hon Clare O'Neil MP, Minister for Home Affairs and Minister for
Cyber Security, announced the Migration Strategy, which outlines a new vision for
rebuilding our migration system for a more prosperous and secure Australia.
The Migration Strategy will address systemic issues by reimagining the immigration system
to serve the national interest and the community.
9
