Attorney-General

Reference: MS24-001030

Mr Peter Khalil MP

Chair

Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security

Parliament House

CANBERRA ACT 2600 By email: pjcis@aph.gov.au

Dear Chair

I am writing to advise you that the Government provided its response to the Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Intelligence and Security’s Advisory Report on the Counter-Terrorism Legislation
Amendment (Declared Areas) Bill 2024 during debate in the House of Representatives on

12 August 2024. The Government has agreed, or agreed in principle, with all of the Committee’s
recommendations. I thank you and the Committee for your considered report.

I have enclosed the Hansard extract containing the government response.

Yours sincerely

THE HON MARK DREYFUS KC MP
2 3 / / /2024

Encl. Hansard extract — House of Representatives — 12 August 2024

Parliament House Canberra ACT 2600 e Telephone: (02) 6277 7300

60 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES Monday, 12 August 2024

To be clear, I recognise—and the committee absolutely recognised—that this bill aims to achieve an important
objective, that being the protection of Australia's national security interests. The declared areas provisions provide
the minister with the power to declare certain areas of a foreign country where a listed terrorist organisation is
engaging in a hostile activity, making it an offence to enter or stay in the area without a legitimate reason. The
intention of those powers is to enable the disruption and prosecution of returning foreign terrorist fighters and their
associates. These provisions are ultimately intended to deter Australians, including families, from travelling to
dangerous conflict areas where listed terrorist organisations are engaging in hostile activities and to protect against
the possibility of terrorist attacks in Australia. And, to be clear, I wholeheartedly support those intentions and that
ambition. However, while this is a legitimate and vital objective, particularly in light of our recently upgraded
terrorism threat level, it should not come at the cost of fundamental human rights. We in this place must critically
consider whether the measures outlined are proportionate to the stated objective.

The declared area offence provisions engage and limit a number of human rights, including the rights to equality,
nondiscrimination, a fair trial, freedom of movement and liberty. When this bill was originally passed in 2014, the
Australian Labor Party, the Australian Greens, Independents and various legal, human rights and other interest
groups expressed concern with the new offence of entering declared areas. In particular, concerns were raised
regarding the limitation on the freedom of movement and the onus of the evidential burden being placed on the
defendant through the use of the exceptions to the offence.

Human rights issues were again raised by various interest groups during the 2021 Parliamentary Joint Committee
on Intelligence and Security review in relation to the declared areas provisions. Again, these concerns questioned
the need for the provisions and raised the possible human rights limitations on freedom of movement and otherwise
legitimate activities. I don't believe these concerns have been adequately addressed.

In its most recent report, the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights reiterated again the concerns that
it had raised regarding human rights in relation to the previous bills dealing with the declared areas provisions and
drew these again to the attention of the Attorney-General and the wider parliament. In summarising its concerns,
the committee stated:

The committee has previously found that while the provisions likely pursue a legitimate objective (namely, that of seeking to
prevent terrorist acts), there were questions whether the provisions were necessary, and, in particular, the measures did not
appear to be proportionate, and therefore were likely to be incompatible with a range of human rights ... As such, the committee
considers that it has not been demonstrated that the extension of these provisions is compatible with human rights.

I also want to note that the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security, in its 2021 review of the
provisions, recommended that the Criminal Code Act 1995 be amended to allow Australian citizens to request an
exemption to travel to a declared area for reasons not listed in the Criminal Code but which are not otherwise
illegitimate under Australian law. Ultimately, the government then did not support the exception that was
recommended. Thus there may be a number of innocent reasons that a person may want to enter or remain in a
declared area that currently would not bring a person within the scope of the legitimate purpose defence.

Despite attempts by the parliamentary joint committee, despite the findings of the inquiry and despite the
submissions that were received from others engaged across the human rights movement, the government has not
amended this legislation. And while, in times when our nation is facing fear, it is understandable that we will move
quickly to adopt legislation that we feel protects us, surely at a time when we have the opportunity to seriously
review something and assess whether we got it right the first time is the moment we should be ensuring that we fix
any mistakes that may have previously been built into the legislation.

As highlighted by the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Human Rights, there is currently a clear lack of sufficient
safeguards or flexibility to constitute a proportionate limit on rights as seen in this legislation. For that reason, and
as a member of the committee, I cannot support the bill in its current form.

Mr DREYFUS (Isaacs—A ttorney-General and Cabinet Secretary) (13:21): I thank my parliamentary colleagues
for their contributions to the debate on the Counter-Terrorism Legislation Amendment (Declared Areas) Bill 2024.
The Albanese government is committed to protecting the Australian community against the real and evolving threat
of terrorism. The declared areas offence in section 119.2 of the Criminal Code Act 1995, which is currently due to
sunset on .7 September 2024, is part of the Australian government's efforts to stop Australians becoming foreign
fighters. Where an area is declared by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, it is an offence to enter or remain in that
area without a legitimate reason.

A declared area is a place where terrorist organisations are engaging in hostile activity. There are very few
legitimate reasons for entering such an area. The offence recognises this by providing a carefully targeted range of
exceptions. Although there are currently no areas declared, these provisions remain a necessary component of our
framework in the current threat environment. The offence plays a role in the disruption and prosecution of returning
foreign fighters and their associates.

CHAMBER

Monday, 12 August 2024 HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES 61
nso a

The bill would extend the offence in section 119.2 for three years to 7 September 2027. A three-year extension
reflects the continued appropriateness of the provisions and is consistent with previous recommendations made by
the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security, including in its report on the bill. This will be the
third time the provision has been extended. The bill would also provide that section 119.3, the provision under
which that Minister for Foreign Affairs can declare an area for the purpose of the offence in section 119.2, also
ceases to have an effect on 7 September 2027. This will align the relevant declaration and offence provisions in the
criminal code.

The government welcomes the report of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security on the
bill and its unanimous recommendation that the bill be passed. The committee made three recommendations for the
government to consider following passage of the bill and before the next sunsetting of the provisions in 2027. The
first is that the government consider reviewing the list of legitimate purpose exceptions for entering or remaining in
a declared area in subsection 119.2(3) of the Criminal Code. This includes considering whether any additional
exceptions should be prescribed by regulations. The government agrees with this recommendation. The government

will consider reviewing the list of legitimate-purpose exceptions and will consult agencies and other relevant
stakeholders.

The second recommendation is:

... that ... the Government consider an additional exception to the offence of entering, or remaining in, an area that has been
declared under section 119.3 of the Criminal Code. The exception would apply where:

e the person is already travelling to, or is already in, the area on the day on which it becomes a declared area, and
e the person leaves the area as soon as practicable, but no later than the period of one month beginning with that day.

The government agrees with this recommendation. The government will consider the proposed additional exception
to the offence of entering or remaining in a declared area and will consult agencies and other relevant stakeholders.
The third recommendation is:

... that .... the Government consider reviewing the existing safeguards on the Minister for Foreign Affairs' discretion to declare
an area under section 119.3 of the Criminal Code. This would include reviewing the Minister's protocol and the list of factors
to be taken into consideration by the Minister for Foreign Affairs before declaring an area.

The government agrees with this recommendation. The government will consider reviewing the safeguards that
apply to the Minister for Foreign Affairs' discretion to declare an area and will consult agencies and other relevant
stakeholders. The government accepts these three recommendations and will consider these matters following
passage of the bill and before the next sunsetting of the provisions in 2027.

The committee also recommended:

... that the Independent National Security Legislation Monitor review Division 119 of the Criminal Code, with particular
attention to the declared areas provisions and their ongoing necessity within the broader counter-terrorism legislative framework.

The committee recommended that the monitor report its findings in relation to the declared areas offence by 7
January 2027. The government agrees in principle with this recommendation. The government is supportive of this
recommendation, noting that the monitor can initiate its own review into this matter.

Finally, the committee recommended that the bill be passed. The government accepts this recommendation. The
Intelligence Services Legislation Amendment Bill 2023, which is currently before the parliament, would empower
the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security to review these provisions before they sunset,
ensuring that due consideration is given to the continued utility of the provisions. This bill reflects the government's
commitment to protecting Australians against the enduring threat of terrorism. I commend the bill to the House.

Question agreed to.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Mr DREYFUS (Isaacs—Attorney-General and Cabinet Secretary) (13:28): by leave—I move:
That this bill be now read a third time.
Question agreed to.
Bill read a third time.

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS
Australian Red Cross: 110th Anniversary

Mr ENTSCH (Leichhardt) (13:29): Iam honoured to help celebrate the 110th anniversary of the Australian Red
Cross. Since its founding on 13 August 1914, the Red Cross has been a pillar of support and compassion, providing

CHAMBER
