Australian Government response to the
Senate Community Affairs References Committee’s report:
Concussions and repeated head trauma in contact sports
[OCTOBER 2024]
1
Introduction
The Australian Government is providing a response to the Senate Community Affairs
References Committee’s (the Committee) report Concussions and repeated head trauma in
contact sports released in September 2023.
On 1 December 2022, the Senate referred an inquiry into concussions and repeated head
trauma in contact sports to the Committee for inquiry and report. The Committee was
tasked with inquiring into and reporting on concussions and repeated head trauma in
contact sports at all levels, for all genders and age groups, with particular reference to:
a) the guidelines and practices contact sports associations and clubs follow in cases of
player concussions and repeated head trauma, including practices undermining
recovery periods and potential risk disclosure;
b) the long-term impacts of concussions and repeated head trauma, including but not
limited to mental, physical, social and professional impacts;
c) the long and short-term support available to players affected by concussion and
repeated head trauma;
d) the liability of contact sports associations and clubs for long-term impacts of player
concussions and repeated head trauma;
e) the role of sports associations and clubs in the debate around concussion and
repeated head trauma, including in financing research;
f) the lack of a consistent definition of what constitutes ‘concussion’;
g) the prevalence, monitoring and reporting of concussion and long-term impacts of
concussion and repeated head trauma, including in First Nations communities;
h) workers, or other, compensation mechanisms for players affected by long-term
impacts of concussions and repeated head trauma;
i) alternative approaches to concussions and repeated head trauma in contact sport,
and awareness raising about its risks;
j) international experiences in modifying sports for children; and
k) any other related matters.
The final report makes 13 recommendations to the Australian Government, focused on
improving data, research, education, harm minimisation and injury support.
2
Response to Recommendations
Key theme: Data Improvements
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the Australian Government establish the National Sports
Injury Database as a matter of urgency, noting this will significantly help address the lack of
sports injury data available in Australia, including at the community level of sport.
Recommendation 2
With a view to increasing transparency, the committee recommends that professional
sporting codes collect data on concussions and identified sub concussive events and share
this data with the National Sports Injury Database.
Response:
The Government agrees in principle with the recommendations and acknowledges the role
of improved sports injury data collection to inform prevention and treatment outcomes.
The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) is responsible for national reporting
on injury in Australia. In partnership with the Australian Sports Commission (ASC) the AIHW
have developed the National Sports Injury Data Strategy (the Strategy) to identify the
national data available on sport and active recreation injury prevention and management.
The 2022-23 Budget provided the ASC with $2.8 million over four years to progress the
development of the Strategy with the AIHW.
The Strategy aims to improve the availability of data on sport and active recreation injuries
in Australia by leveraging existing data sources, strengthening data collection methods and
standards, and creating a national sport and active recreation injury database: the National
Sport Injury Data Asset (NSIDA). The NSIDA will provide valuable insight on the impact of
these injuries by:
• helping individuals, organisations, researchers, and policymakers understand the
risks of injury in sport and active recreation
• identifying injury patterns and trends
• measuring the costs of sport and active recreation injuries to the health system and
the benefits of prevention programs
• indicating where and what type of injury prevention programs are needed
• providing ongoing surveillance (subject to funding) to identify emerging risks and
evaluate injury prevention programs in the community.
There is currently no mandate for sporting organisations to collect, report or share data on
sports injury. Some community sporting codes collect their own data; however, most
sources of sport and active recreation injury data vary in the types and amounts of
information being collected, quality (e.g. accuracy, completeness, consistency), and format.
Ongoing access to consistent and high-quality data, particularly from community sporting
organisations, would allow the NSIDA to provide evidence for better understanding of the
3
impacts of sport and active recreation injuries. This will support participation in sport and
active recreation and improve the overall wellbeing of Australians. The Government
recognises the benefits of optimising data collection and sharing however, further
consideration is required as to how this is best achieved.
In laying the foundation for developing the NSIDA, the AIHW is currently creating a data
collection manual and an updated sports injury data dictionary to support data collectors to
expand, improve and standardise the injury data they are currently collecting.
4
Key theme: Research
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the Australian Government consider establishing
independent research pathways, including through a newly created body or through existing
bodies, such as the National Health and Medical Research Council (NHMRC), that is
dedicated to supporting and coordinating research into the short and long-term effects of
concussion and repeated head trauma incurred during participation in sport, including
Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy (CTE).
The committee envisages that, amongst other things, such pathways would enable well-
structured scientific investigations—including prospective, longitudinal clinicopathological
studies—to help identify clinical features, progression, and interventions.
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the Australian Government and sporting organisations
continue to fund research into the effects of concussion and repeated head trauma on at-risk
cohorts who incur these injuries during their participation in sport.
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends that the Australian Government consider measures to
encourage Australians, in the event of their death, to donate their brain to a brain bank for
scientific research into brain health and disease, including Chronic Traumatic
Encephalopathy.
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends that the Australian Government consider a coordinated and
consolidated funding framework for ongoing research regarding sport-related concussion
and repeated head trauma.
This work should be undertaken in consultation with state and territory governments,
sporting organisations, universities, and other scientific research bodies. The committee
recommends the governing bodies of sports associated with concussion and repeated head
trauma support their codes to invest in the health and welfare of their players.
Response:
The Government agrees in principle with the recommendations four and five and supports
the need for research to understand the short- and long-term impact of concussion and
repeated head trauma.
The Government currently funds research focussed on Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) through
the Medical Research Future Fund (MRFF) grant opportunities, and the NHMRC. The MRFF,
established under the Medical Research Future Fund Act 2015 (MRFF Act), provides grants
of financial assistance to support vital health and medical research and innovation to
improve the health and wellbeing of Australians. The NHMRC is an independent statutory
5
agency within the portfolio of the Australian Government Minister for Health and Aged
Care. They are the nation’s leading expert body in health and medical research.
Through the MRFF, $50 million has been committed over ten years to the TBI Mission to
support research designed to improve the lives of all Australians who experience mild,
moderate, and severe TBIs and improve patient recovery after brain injury. This includes
projects that predict recovery outcomes or identify effective care and treatments, to reduce
barriers to living the best quality of life after a traumatic brain injury. Since its inception in
2015, the Government, through the MRFF, has invested $7.5 million in 6 grants with a focus
on concussion research, primarily through the TBI Mission. A review of the TBI Mission’s
Roadmap and Implementation Plan is currently underway to ensure the Mission accounts
for emerging evidence and is consistent with the Government’s responses to the Senate
Inquiry into concussions and repeated head trauma in contact sport and the Inquiry into
family, domestic and sexual violence. The review will also allow consideration of recent
policy frameworks such as the National Plan to end Violence against Women and Children
2022-2032, and relevant action plans such as the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Action
Plan 2023–2025. The review is expected to be completed by the end of 2024.
Between 2013 and 2022, the NHMRC expended $1.6 million towards research relevant to
CTE and $92.7 million towards research relevant to TBI. The NHMRC also supports Targeted
Calls for Research (TCRs), through a one-time request for grant applications to address a
specific health issue where there is a significant knowledge gap or unmet need.
The ASC provides clear and concise advice, information and support for Australian sport
related matters, including sport-related concussion. In 2021, the Government provided
$340,000 to the ASC as part of the Concussion and Brain Health Project (2021-24). The
project aims to provide clear, consistent, and current messaging regarding concussion and
brain health in alignment with the latest medical advice and improve the understanding of
the relationship between sport-related concussion and long-term brain health by
undertaking the recruitment of a comparison group/control arm of former elite able-bodied
athletes from non-contact, collision, or combat sports (for example, swimmers, rowers, and
track and field athletes). The ASC also received $60,000 USD (approximately $80,000 AUD)
from the International Olympic Committee (IOC) for the recruitment and data collection of
30 former female contact sport athletes. The findings from this study will be publicly
available upon completion of data collection and analysis.
The Government agrees in principle with recommendation five regarding encouraging
donations to brain banks and supports the need to understand the relationship between
findings of CTE histopathological change at autopsy with symptoms (or absence of
symptoms) in life. However, further considerations are needed to reduce risk of bias by
blinding studies (histopathologists should not know history of deceased person at time of
autopsy) and considering a second opinion on all new CTE cases identified by
histopathologist separate from CTE research labs. Consideration should also be given to
encouraging brain donation from former contact / collision sport athletes who had no
symptoms of poor brain health at the time of death.
The Government notes recommendations three and six. There are existing funding
frameworks in place for research regarding sport-related concussion and repeated head
6
trauma. The Government continues to consult with state and territory governments,
sporting organisations, universities, and other scientific research bodies around ongoing
research and the development of pathways to enable well-structured scientific
investigations—including prospective, longitudinal clinicopathological studies—to help
identify clinical features, progression, and interventions.
7
Key theme: Education
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends that the Department of Health and Aged Care in consultation
with relevant stakeholders, consider how best to improve community awareness and
education regarding concussion and repeated head trauma, with these measures being
health lead. These initiatives would help individuals:
• recognise the acute signs and symptoms of concussion;
• appropriately respond to and manage such injuries; and
• understand the short- and long-term risks of concussion and repeated head trauma.
The committee recommends the development of awareness and education initiatives, with
appropriate consideration given to dissemination strategies; the need to review or update
existing materials; and ensuring tailored resources are available to different cohorts
including, players, parents, coaches, teachers, other volunteers involved in sport and the
general public.
Recommendation 8
The committee recommends that the Australian Government, in partnership with state and
territory governments consider how best to address calls for:
• the development of standardised, evidence-based, and easy-to access concussion and
head trauma guidelines for GPs;
• suitable general practice consultations for people with concussion, repeated head
trauma and other complex care needs; and
• increased training for first aid responders at sporting venues that focuses specifically on
treating concussion and head injury.
Response:
The Government agrees with the recommendations.
On 1 February 2024, the ASC, through the Australian Institute of Sport (AIS), launched an
updated version of the Concussion and Brain Health Position Statement (the 2024 Position
Statement) in partnership with the Australasian College of Sport and Exercise Physicians,
Sports Medicine Australia and the Australian Physiotherapy Association. The 2024 Position
Statement provides contemporary evidence-based information on concussion, including the
Australian Concussion Guidelines for Community and Youth Sport, which in a world first,
aligns concussion advice in the United Kingdom, New Zealand and Australia. The ASC
engaged with the United Kingdom through the Department for Culture, Media and Sport,
and New Zealand’s Accident Compensation Corporation on their successful education and
awareness material to progress international alignment of guidance and materials.
The 2024 Position Statement brings together the latest evidence-based information and
operates on a principle of ‘an abundance of caution’ i.e., ‘if in doubt, sit them out.’ The
8
Statement contains guidance for adaptable return to play protocols, including more
conservative approaches for children and adults with a history of multiple concussions.
The ASC launched the Concussion in Sport Australia website in 2019, which contains the
2024 Position Statement. The website also has resources and online modules to assist in
addressing and managing sport-related concussion, tailored to athletes, coaches, teachers,
parents, medical practitioners, and health care practitioners. It has become a valuable and
trusted resource for the management of sports-related concussion for all Australians,
regardless of the sport, location, or level of participation. The ASC keeps the website up to
date, and added educational resources (i.e. Infographics, fact sheets and videos) in February
2024.
In addition to the Concussion in Sport Australia website, the ASC developed media
campaigns and social media activity to support the launch of the 2024 Position Statement. It
has also started a series of education initiatives for schools and community groups, to raise
awareness and educate in relation to concussion.
The Government is complementing these efforts with a new initiative to increase public
awareness about CTE. The 2024-25 Budget committed $12.5 million to Dementia Australia
to support populations at risk of dementia, including those with suspected CTE. This funding
will support Dementia Australia to develop and rollout a community awareness and
education campaign on concussion and maintaining brain health, including while
participating in sport. This campaign will be informed by consultation with teachers,
parents, students, researchers, sports organisations and people with lived experience of CTE
symptoms. Dementia Australia will also work closely with the ASC to ensure alignment and
consistency of messaging.
The ASC welcomes opportunities to further promote awareness and education to the wider
public. Ongoing monitoring of research and evidence will inform the continuous refinement
of supporting education resources. This will include updated internationally recognised
evidence to support the most contemporary approach to education and awareness of
concussion in sport.
9
Key theme: Harm Minimisation
Recommendation 9
The committee recommends that national sporting organisations in Australia explore further
rule modifications for their respective sports in order to prevent and reduce the impact of
concussion and repeated head trauma. This work should prioritise modifications that protect
children and adolescents and take into account emerging evidence both domestically and
internationally.
Recommendation 10
The committee recommends that the Australian Government, in collaboration with medical
experts, develops return to play protocols, adaptable across all sports, for both children and
adults that have incurred a concussion or suffered a head trauma. The committee envisages
that protocols may include lengthier standdown periods for children and individuals who
have a history of repeated head trauma.
Recommendation 11
The committee recommends that the Australian Government consider developing a national
strategy to reduce the incidence and impacts of concussion, including binding return to play
protocols and other rules to protect sport participants from head injuries. Consideration
should be given to whether any existing government bodies would be best placed to monitor,
oversee and/or enforce concussion related rules and return to play protocols in Australian
sports.
Response:
The Government notes recommendation nine as it does not have responsibility for the
matters outlined in this recommendation. The Government will support a proactive
approach to raise awareness of these recommendations to professional sporting codes.
The Government agrees in principle with the recommendations 10 and 11.
The Concussion and Brain Health Position Statement 2024, developed by the ASC, brings
together the most contemporary evidence-based information and presents it in a format
that is appropriate for all stakeholders to adopt. The 2024 Position Statement is a national
guide relating to current best practices for prevention, recognition, and management of
sport-related concussion, underpinned by the latest contemporary evidence. It should not
be interpreted as a guideline for clinical practice or legal standard of care. Healthcare
practitioners are the appropriate authority to make decisions on an athletes return to play
to optimize recovery and wellbeing for the individual. The Position Statement is intended to
ensure that participant safety and welfare is paramount when dealing with concussion in
sport.
The Government agrees that there should be specific guidance for longer stand down
periods where there are multiple concussions within a short time frame. The precise
circumstances are highly variable and therefore involvement of an experienced clinician is
crucial. The ASC’s 2024 Position Statement, including the Australian Concussion Guidelines
10
for Community and Youth Sport, provides updated return to play protocols, and additional
information for circumstances of multiple concussions, adaptable across all sports for both
children and adults that have incurred a concussion or suffered head trauma. The Australian
Concussion Guidelines for Community and Youth Sport also bring alignment to concussion
protocols in youth and community sport across Australia, the United Kingdom, and New
Zealand. The 2024 Position Statement also includes the latest evidence presented by the
Concussion in Sport Group at the 6th International Consensus Conference on Concussion in
Sport held in Amsterdam in October 2022.
11
Key theme: Injury support
Recommendation 12
The committee recommends that professional sporting codes and players associations
consider ways for a best practice model to provide ongoing support, financial and otherwise,
to current and former players affected by concussions and repeated head trauma.
Recommendation 13
The committee encourages professional sports organisations to ensure their athletes have
insurance coverage for head trauma. The committee also encourages state and territory
governments to engage with professional sporting organisations to explore how the general
exclusion of professional sports people from various state and territory workers’
compensation schemes could be removed. The committee envisages that such a review
should, amongst other things, assess the financial impact such a reform would have on the
various sporting organisations across Australia.
Response:
The Government notes these recommendations.
The Government does not have responsibility for the matters outlined in these
recommendations. The Government will support a proactive approach to raise awareness of
these recommendations to professional sporting codes and further discuss with state and
territory governments.
The ASC’s Concussion in Australian Sport website contains the Concussion and Brain Health
Position Statement 2024, including the Australian Concussion Guidelines for Community and
Youth Sport, and provides information and resources which are publicly available. Since the
release of the ASCs updated Concussion and Brain Health Position Statement in February
2024, many sporting organisations have reviewed the updated information and confirmed
they are actively implementing changes to their processes in alignment with the ASC’s
position.
12
