Australian Government response to the
Environment and Communications References Committee report:
Australian Antarctic Division funding
NOVEMBER 2024
Introduction
On 9 August 2023, the Senate referred an inquiry into the current management of the
funding of the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) to the Environment and Communications
References Committee. The committee was referred the following terms of reference:
The current management of the funding of the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD), with
particular reference to:
(a) revelations that the AAD is pursuing cuts worth roughly 16% of its operating budget;
(b) the direct and indirect impacts of cuts to public funding of Australia’s Antarctic
activities, including on full-time, part-time and contract AAD jobs;
(c) the ramifications for Australia’s international commitments and obligations;
(d) the internal compilation of a list of at least 56 existing projects, programs and
research activities that could be cut and/or terminated;
(e) the extent of the Albanese Government’s involvement in, and response to, these
cost-cutting plans;
(f) the consequences of funding cuts to Australia’s Antarctic program for our country’s
geopolitical and strategic international interests;
(g) complications that the proposed $25 million worth of cuts will cause for the full
delivery of the Australian Antarctic Science Strategic Plan, the Australian Antarctic
Strategy, the 20-year Action Plan, and the extra $804.4 million Antarctic funding
package delivered by the Morrison Government in early 2022;
(h) the widespread view, including among numerous Antarctic science experts, that
funding cuts of this scale and nature are catastrophic for Australia; and
(i) any other related matters.
On 9 May 2024, the committee tabled a report titled Australian Antarctic Division funding.
The Government notes that it is the responsibility of the Department of Climate Change,
Energy, the Environment and Water (DCCEEW) to deliver Antarctic science and policy
objectives within the budget envelope provided by the Government. As detailed in evidence
to the inquiry, there has been no ‘cut’ in funding appropriated to the department. In contrast,
the government has provided record funding to the Australian Antarctic Program.
Since coming into government, the Government has delivered over $1.4 billion in new
funding for the Australian Antarctic Program. This includes appropriating $804.4 million over
ten years to deliver its priorities in Antarctica in the October 2022-23 Budget and further
significant investments in 2024-25 to support delivery of the Australian Antarctic Program,
committing almost half a billion dollars to build a brand new research station on Macquarie
Island, support Antarctic shipping and secure Tasmania’s future status as Australia’s
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Gateway. This is in addition to the $60 million in contingency
funding for supplementary shipping which was made available at the Mid-Year Economic
and Fiscal Outlook for 2023-24.
The Government will invest $371.1 million over nine years for a new research station on
Macquarie Island to provide year-round facilities for the multiple Australian and Tasmanian
government departments and agencies that use the island. The station will allow Australia to
continue to build its understanding of the Southern Ocean, while delivering critical services
like weather forecasting, natural disaster alerts, international nuclear monitoring and
measurement of greenhouse gas emissions.
The Government will also provide a capital contribution to the Tasmanian Government of
$188 million over four years from 2025-26, to enable construction of a new, fit-for-purpose
Macquarie Wharf 6 in the Port of Hobart and secure the long-term future of the Australian
Antarctic Program in Tasmania.
The Government is providing $109.6 million over three years from 2023-24 to support the
continued operations of RSV Nuyina, including management of short-term shipping risks.
A further $17.6 million over two years from 2024-25 in new funding supports marine science
and environmental management by allowing the RSV Nuyina to undertake an additional
60 days at sea each year across the next two years. It will enable a dedicated marine
science voyage in 2024-25 to study the Denman Glacier, which is one of the fastest
retreating glaciers in Antarctica and holds a potential sea level rise of 1.5 metres. It will also
provide for an environmental management visit to the sub-Antarctic Heard Island and
McDonald Islands, intended for 2025-26.
This will build on the delivery of world-class science through the Denman Terrestrial
Campaign, conducting a 1200km traverse to deliver essential equipment for the Million Year
Ice Core Project – one of the most ambitious and challenging scientific projects yet to be
undertaken in Antarctica, seabird monitoring at Mawson and Bunger Hills, environmental risk
mitigation and remediation of contaminated sites at Casey research station, underway
observations and instrument deployments on RSV Nuyina. The AAD is also delivering a
range of priority science across our Antarctic and sub-Antarctic stations, including long term
monitoring of the atmosphere and cryosphere, sea level, ice sheets, seismic waves,
radionuclide and infrasound, fisheries and Antarctic mapping.
The department has also made a significant and long-term commitment to implementing the
recommendations of the Russell Review in full, and has already taken a number of steps to
improve governance and culture within the division, including to ensure better budget
oversight. The department has increased transparency and scrutiny of budgets, resulting in
the AAD’s success in delivering significant outcomes, within its budget, in the 2023-24
financial year.
The Government’s response to the recommendations in the report is as follows.
Response
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) immediately develop
and publish annual accountability metrics and performance targets, which better support
and promote the role of Antarctic science. Such metrics should include (but not be limited
to):
details of science funding as a percentage of the operational budget of the AAD;
the proportion of AAD staff engaged in a science role as a percentage of all AAD
staff, with a breakdown of ongoing, non-ongoing and contractor positions;
the development and utilisation of science infrastructure in Antarctica, including
science beds on bases;
the number of science projects supported, not supported or otherwise delayed;
and
the use of the RSV Nuyina in Antarctic research and how the RSV Nuyina will be
utilised in future years.
The committee recommends the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment
and Water release a discussion paper with proposed accountability metrics and annual
performance targets, with details on how these metrics will be improved and increased
over time.
Response
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
DCCEEW has published information about the 2024-25 Antarctic Season on the Australian
Antarctic Program’s website.
The department has matured its performance approach since its creation, including for
Outcome 3. Work to mature our approach to ensure performance measures that
demonstrate progress in achieving the purpose of the department in accordance with the
requirements of the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Rule 2014 is
ongoing. The department publishes data relevant to its existing performance measures,
including for Outcome 3, in its Annual Report.
The department will leverage the work of the Australian National Audit Office (ANAO)’s audit
of the Annual Performance Statements of Australian Government Entities – 2022-23 and
work with the Australian Antarctic Science Council to review the performance measures for
Outcome 3 in line with requirements under the PGPA Act and Rule and guidance from the
Department of Finance.
Improved performance measures will better support the department to demonstrate progress
towards achieving its purpose and key activities. The Government does not consider it
appropriate to release a discussion paper with proposed accountability metrics for the AAD.
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) commission an
independent review of the management, culture and performance of the AAD’s operations
and logistics branches. The review should consider how these sections of the AAD
interact with and support the endeavours of the Science Branch. The review should be
completed as soon as possible, to contribute to the development and implementation of
an integrated planning model at the AAD.
Response
The Government accepts this recommendation in part.
The Russell Review, released in April 2023, has already provided a comprehensive
independent analysis of the Australian Antarctic Division’s culture and provides
recommendations to build a foundation for cultural change across the whole division,
including in relation to improved leadership, management and governance arrangements.
In making her findings, Ms Russell was able to draw on the experiences of more than 40% of
the AAD’s staff, who contributed to the review though surveys, interviews or written
submissions.
The foundations built through Ms Russell’s recommendations seek to improve both
management and performance across the AAD. Work underway, while not specific to the
Operations and Logistics or Science Branches, will support enabling a positive culture and
create a psychologically safe workplace for our people and performance to thrive.
DCCEEW has made a significant investment and a long-term commitment to implementing
the recommendations of the Russell Review in full. A ‘one-division’ approach recognises the
interdependency of all elements of the AAD in successful delivery of the Australian Antarctic
Program, and that meaningful and enduring change is necessary across the whole division
with support from the department. This will require sustained effort and ongoing
transparency around implementation progress and results.
The department will formally monitor and evaluate progress over the medium and long-term
and report openly about its overall status. This will include:
• A 12-month review of progress towards building a positive culture through
implementing the recommendations of the Russell Review.
• A two-year independent review to evaluate progress and outcomes achieved.
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the Australian Antarctic Division prioritise the
development and implementation of an integrated planning model, as recommended by
the Australian Antarctic Science Program Governance Review of December 2017 (the
‘Clarke Review’).
Response
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
The Government agrees that integrated planning is a principle that must be embedded in the
way the AAD does business and is essential for the effective operation of the Australian
Antarctic Program, to enable delivery of our crucial scientific and geo-strategic policy
outcomes and meet our workplace health and safety obligations for our staff and other
participants of the Australian Antarctic Program.
The Government welcomes the Committee’s finding that there “have been considerable
improvements in business practices” in the AAD. The work already underway within the AAD
to develop a collaborative culture, re-set accountability and decision-making arrangements
and provide certainty about budget will be critical to the success of the Program and are the
foundations of an integrated planning approach.
The AAD will continue to focus on this area, drawing on insights from a number of recent
reviews, to deliver a practical integrated planning process.
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment
and Water implement all recommendations of the Independent Review of Workplace
Culture and Change at the Australian Antarctic Division (AAD) and table in the Senate a
full government response to the Independent Review, no later than 30 June 2024.
Response
The Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
DCCEEW has committed to implementing the recommendations arising from the Russell
Review in full. The department’s comprehensive response was released on 3 April 2023.
The department has published a 12-month review of progress towards building a positive
culture through implementing the department’s Russell response plan. The Russell Review,
the department’s response, and the 12-month review are available at
www.dcceew.gov.au/about/publications/russell-review.
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends that the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the
Environment and Water release the draft Decadal Plan, including the six draft science
outcome statements, as soon as possible. A brief public consultation period should follow
the release of the draft Decadal Plan, to ensure it reflects the views of the Antarctic
scientific community.
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends that the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the
Environment and Water finalise the Decadal Plan and provide it to the Minister for the
Environment and Water within three months of appointment of a new Chief Scientist to the
Australian Antarctic Division, or no later than 31 October 2024, whichever is earlier.
The committee recommends that the Decadal Plan be endorsed by the Australian
Government and fully funded as part of the 2025-26 Budget. The Decadal Plan should be
made public as soon as finalised, and no later than the end of 2024.
Response
The Government accepts these recommendations in principle.
Science plays a core role in advancing Australia’s Antarctic and national interests. Our
scientific activities provide a strong presence in the Australian Antarctic Territory, and our
collaborations foster engagement with other Antarctic nations and underpin a shared
understanding of the region.
The Australian Antarctic Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan outlines Australia’s position as a
leader in Antarctic science and demonstrates the Government’s continued commitment to
Antarctic science. The Government remains committed to a Decadal Plan for Australian
Antarctic Science which will sit under the Strategy and 20 Year Action Plan. It will guide the
activities of the Australian Antarctic Science Program to ensure that Australia continues to
deliver world class science, maintaining Australia’s position as a leader with a reputation for
excellence in Antarctic science. The Decadal Plan will set the direction for key science
activities to be undertaken over the next decade in support of Australia’s national interests.
The Decadal Plan is being developed in close consultation with the scientific community.
Over 200 Australian Antarctic Science Program participants have provided input and a
further 50 experts contributed to the process of prioritising this input into the highest priority
outcomes.
The department is looking forward to working with the science council under the leadership
of the new Chair Dr Nick Gales, to finalise the Decadal Plan. Noting that the current draft
outcome statements were provided by the department in testimony to the inquiry, the
department will provide further drafts of the Decadal Plan, including the outcome statements,
to stakeholders as part of the work to finalise the Decadal Plan.
Decisions about additional funding will be considered in the context of future budget
processes.
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends the Australian Antarctic Division immediately readvertise the
20 positions which were originally announced in 2022-23, and progress the recruitment for
ongoing staff wherever possible, and for staffing within the Science Branch.
Response
The Government notes this recommendation.
DCCEEW is focused on ensuring secure and ongoing employment for staff. Where
appropriate, the department will continue to work through the process of converting contract
positions into ongoing roles, including for positions which have been filled through
non-ongoing or contract arrangements for many years.
We have already begun this process and have converted over 30 staff to ongoing positions.
Further work is underway to recruit positions in the Science branch, which will support:
environmental stewardship and remediation; Australia’s engagement under the Convention
on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CAMLR), including through
seabird research and fisheries data analysis; data integration and curation, mapping
services, our understanding and response to avian influenza; and the Antarctic Climate and
Million Year Ice Core programs.
Recommendation 8
The committee recommends that the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the
Environment and Water, through endorsement of the Expenditure Review Committee,
include in all future Budgets a line item specifically identifying the Antarctic science
appropriation for each Budget year and across the forward estimates.
Response
The Government notes this recommendation.
DCCEEW’s Portfolio Budget Statement includes dedicated funding for the Antarctic Program
(Outcome 3) for each Budget year and across the forward estimates. Outcome 3 includes
capital and operational funding for departmental operations (including for staff, logistics and
operations to deliver Australia’s scientific research and operations in Antarctica and the
Southern Ocean). Outcome 3 also includes $5 million a year until 2028-29 under the
Antarctic Science Collaboration Initiative. This administered funding supports the Australian
Antarctic Program Partnership.
Recommendation 9
The committee recommends the Australian Government, as a matter of urgency, provide
ongoing annual funding to the Special Research Initiative in Excellence in Antarctic
Science, to be indexed annually and incorporated into the Decadal Plan on an ongoing
basis.
Recommendation 10
The committee recommends the Australian Government immediately transfer Australian
Research Council funding for Antarctic science, including the Special Research Initiative
in Excellence in Antarctic Science, to the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the
Environment and Water.
Response
The Government notes these recommendations.
The Government supports arrangements that deliver integrated and strategic Antarctic
science in support of Australia’s national Antarctic interests. The Decadal Plan for Australian
Antarctic Science and the Australian Antarctic Science Council are key to ensuring a whole
of government approach to Antarctic science.
The Government supports long-term certainty for Antarctic science. Decisions about
additional funding will be considered in the context of future budgets.
Recommendation 11
The committee recommends the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade review the
current arrangements for its dedicated Antarctic office, so that it better co-ordinates and
promotes Australia’s whole-of-government scientific, strategic and geopolitical
engagement with Antarctica. The review should consider whether the DFAT Antarctic
office is adequately resourced and supported by an appropriate number of full-time staff.
Response
The Government notes this recommendation.
In addition to staff that work on Antarctic issues across the Department of Foreign Affairs
and Trade (DFAT), DFAT established a standalone Antarctic Section in September 2022.
DFAT is keeping the role and resourcing of this new section under review as it evolves.
DFAT and DCCEEW will continue to work closely together across government to increase
awareness and expertise on Antarctic issues and to coordinate scientific and geopolitical
engagement to deliver a joined-up Australian Antarctic Program that supports Australia’s
national interests.
Recommendation 12
The committee recommends that the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the
Environment and Water review the terms of reference for the Australian Antarctic Science
Council (AASC). The review should be broad but include consideration of at least the
following matters:
the membership of the AASC;
implementing a process for declaring and managing conflicts of interest; and
the extent to which the AASC should have responsibility for the allocation of
Antarctic science funding.
Response
The Government accepts this recommendation.
DCCEEW has commenced work to review the terms of reference for the Australian Antarctic
Science Council, including consideration of the matters raised by the committee. The
Minister for the Environment and Water will consider the terms of reference in the context of
considering the Decadal Plan for Australian Antarctic Science.
Recommendation 13
The committee recommends the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment
and Water develop as a matter of priority a business case for the acquisition of a second
vessel to support Australia’s presence in Antarctica. Such a vessel should be deployed
primarily for logistics, to allow the RSV Nuyina to be deployed with a greater focus and
frequency on science projects.
Response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The RSV Nuyina is a world-leading icebreaker, resupply and marine science vessel. Delays
with its delivery and commissioning, which date back to the Morrison Liberal-National
Government, have delayed the full use of this advanced scientific capability, however the
Government notes the achievements of the RSV Nuyina in delivering outcomes during the
2023-24 Antarctic season.
The Government will continue to improve planning and deployment of assets to maximise
scientific outcomes in Antarctica, and has announced an additional $109.6 million in the
2024-25 Budget to support RSV Nuyina to deliver the Australian Antarctic Program, and
$17.6 million over two years for dedicated marine science voyages.
Decisions about further funding will be considered in the context of future budget processes.
Recommendation 14
The committee recommends the Australian Government increase funding to Antarctic
shipping to enable the RSV Nuyina to ship 250-300 days per year, and to include
contingency funding for the hiring or leasing of a second ship as needed.
Response
The Government accepts this recommendation in part.
The Government has provided an additional $127.3 million for Antarctic shipping in the
2024-25 Budget. This includes funding to meet increasing operational costs associated with
the RSV Nuyina, as well as $17.6 million over the next two years, supporting the
RSV Nuyina to spend an additional 60 days at sea each year, on a science voyage to the
Denman Glacier in 2024-25, and the Heard Island and McDonald Islands management
voyage in 2025-26. It also includes the $60 million in contingency funding for supplementary
shipping which was made available at the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook for
2023-24.
Decisions about funding will be considered in the context of future budget processes.
Recommendation 15
The committee recommends that the Australian and Tasmanian Governments and the
Australian Antarctic Division work to swiftly resolve any outstanding matters related to the
redevelopment of Wharf 6 at Macquarie Point, including issues of funding and the contract
provisions with TasPorts, in a fair and appropriate manner. The committee further
recommends that the AAD publicly provide a report on progress no later than 30 June
2025.
Response
The Government accepts this recommendation.
The Government has secured Hobart’s future as the home port of Australia’s icebreaker,
RSV Nuyina, and the long-term future of the Australian Antarctic Program in Tasmania, with
an agreement with the Tasmanian Government for a new, fit-for-purpose Macquarie Wharf
6.
The Government will provide a capital contribution to the Tasmanian Government of $188
million over four years from 2025-26. The funding will enable construction of a new
Macquarie Wharf 6 in the Port of Hobart, securing Tasmania’s future status as Australia’s
Antarctic and Southern Ocean Gateway.
The Tasmanian Government will provide a refuelling solution for RSV Nuyina in the Port of
Hobart, and will manage the project and be responsible for all construction costs and
ongoing maintenance of the Wharf over the 30-year period.
Recommendation 16
The committee recommends that the Australian National Audit Office undertake its
potential 2023-24 audit into the effectiveness of the Department of Climate Change,
Energy, the Environment and Water’s management of Australia’s Antarctic presence,
including arrangements to support Australia fulfilling its environmental responsibilities.
Response
The Government notes this recommendation.
As an independent officer of the Parliament the Auditor-General’s responses to
parliamentary committee recommendations directed to the ANAO are not included as part of
the government response. The ANAO will provide a response to this recommendation
directly to the Environment and Communications References Committee.
Coalition Recommendation 1
That Minister the Hon Tanya Plibersek MP clearly explain on the public record, including
in a Ministerial Statement to Parliament, why she failed to heed the advice—provided to
her from as least as early as March or April 2023—that there were a range of financial and
associated pressures mounting at the Australian Antarctic Division.
Coalition Recommendation 2
That Minister the Hon Tanya Plibersek MP clearly explain on the public record, including
in a Ministerial Statement to Parliament, why she failed to take any practical action
following her office being directly advised, in July 2023, that there had been an
extraordinary overspend of $41.4 million at the Australian Antarctic Division.
Response
The Government notes these recommendations.
The management of the department, including departmental funding, is a matter for the
Secretary of the department. Since DCCEEW’s establishment on 1 July 2022, the Secretary
has continued to invest in maturing the department’s systems and processes to ensure
appropriate oversight over budgets and report on the delivery of outcomes. This investment
will continue.
The Government has made a significant investment in the 2024-25 budget to support
delivery of the Australian Antarctic Program, committing almost half a billion dollars to build a
brand new research station on Macquarie Island and support Antarctic shipping. This is in
addition to the $60 million in contingency funding for supplementary shipping which was
made available at the Mid-Year Economic and Fiscal Outlook (MYEFO) for 2023-24.
Additionally, the program will be bolstered by a $188 million investment announced at
MYEFO for 2024-25 for the construction of a new Macquarie Wharf 6 at the Port of Hobart.
This new wharf will serve as a dedicated facility for the RSV Nuyina.
Coalition Recommendation 3
That the Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water immediately
publicly release the full, itemised list of commitments in the original and comprehensive
$804.4 million funding package announced by the Coalition Government in early 2022—
as well as an up-to-date, revised list of how much has been spent on each of those items
and how much remains to be spent. There also needs to be a clear indication for each
item of how much money has been shifted away from them—and to where this money has
been redirected.
Response
The Government does not accept this recommendation.
The Government notes that the Coalition did not appropriate the funding it announced in
early 2022. Documentation in relation to the deliberations on this funding package are
Cabinet documents, which are confidential to the Government which created them and not
the property of the sponsoring minister or department.
It was the Albanese Government that appropriated $804.4 million over ten years to deliver its
priorities in Antarctica. This funding was appropriated as a single measure in the
October 2022-23 Budget. It was described in the Regional Ministerial Budget Statement
2022-23 as follows:
$136.6 million over the next five years for critical activities including environmental
protection and management, charting activities for safe navigation and continuation
of Australia’s inland (Antarctic traverse) transport for major science campaigns
$92.3 million per year from 2026-27 to support Australia’s ongoing Antarctic activities
$17.4 million for enhanced marine science in the Southern Ocean
All funding appropriated to Outcome 3 in 2022-23 and 2023-24 was expended in delivery of
these priorities.
To date the following has been delivered
in partnership with the University of Tasmania, an agreement to build a world-leading
Southern Ocean research aquarium; krill and krill ecosystems are a major science
focus of the program
safety improvements, including:
o twin-engine helicopters were introduced into the program in 2022-23 to
enhance safety and to support remote field work as they provide greater
range and increased passenger capability;
o a new operational management centre was established in 2022 to enable a
high degree of situational awareness and ensure the availability and
management of emergency response and safety measures to protect
personnel and assets;
o rollout of an ICT uplift program, including providing better tracking of
expeditioners in deep field and remote locations
development and deployment of remote field base capabilities to support science
projects, including the Denman Terrestrial Campaign
enhancing our international engagement to support a strong and effective Antarctic
Treaty System and to deepen engagement with other Antarctic states
designed and delivered an Antarctic traverse capability which is critical to delivering
the flagship Million Year Ice Core program – one of Australia’s most ambitious and
challenging scientific projects in Antarctica – the quest to drill ice cores that can
provide a million-year record of Earth’s climate and atmospheric composition
continuing to investigate opportunities for the application of innovative, remote
technologies
continuing to deliver core critical activities for the Australian Antarctic Program
including environmental management activities such as environmental risk mitigation
and remediation of contaminated sites at Casey.
This funding is ongoing and will continue to be used to deliver commitments to advance
Australia’s national interests in Antarctica, as set out in the Australian Antarctic Strategy and
20 Year Action Plan.
Coalition Recommendation 4
That the Albanese Government immediately commit, in writing, to no further reductions
during its time in office of the Australian Antarctic Division’s footprint in Hobart.
As part of this, the Government should commit to finalising and delivering new funding and
development plans for the Macquarie Wharf upgrades and fuel barge as a matter of
urgency. Similarly, they must urgently clarify and finalise their plans for the construction of
the Antarctic and Science Precinct, and the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic
Marine Living Resources headquarters.
Response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Government remains committed to Hobart as Australia’s Antarctic Gateway,
the home of the Australian Antarctic Division and the Commission for the Conservation of
Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) headquarters.
Since coming into government, the Government has delivered over $1.4 billion in new
funding for the Australian Antarctic Program and secured the long-term future of the
Program in Tasmania. This includes a capital contribution to the Tasmanian Government of
$188 million over four years from 2025-26, for the construction of a new Macquarie Wharf 6
in the Port of Hobart. In return, the Tasmanian Government will provide a refuelling solution
for RSV Nuyina in the Port of Hobart.
Coalition Recommendation 5
That TasPorts be explicitly instructed, and/or even mandated by changes to its charter
conditions, by the Tasmanian and Federal governments to work more cooperatively and
proactively with other stakeholders.
Response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The management of TasPorts is a matter for the Tasmanian Liberal Government. There is
no role for the Australian Government to engage in the management of a State Government
Business Enterprise.
Coalition Recommendation 6
That the Albanese Government immediately oversee a significant improvement in the
quality of answers to questions asked at Parliamentary hearings and on notice—in a direct
reversal of their (recently-leaked) instructions to public servants to the completely opposite
effect.
Response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government acknowledges the important role the Parliament and its Committees play in
examining the operations of government and takes its obligations very seriously.
The Government remains committed to engaging with Parliamentary Committees in a
transparent and accountable manner.
Coalition Recommendation 7
That a further private hearing of the committee be held to examine whether certain
witnesses should be regarded as having been in contempt of their obligations to this
inquiry process, and whether other potential witnesses may have been bullied into
deciding not to participate.
Response
The Government notes this recommendation.
This recommendation is a matter for the committee.
