Australian Government response to the
Senate Committee Economics report:
Treasury Laws Amendment (Delivering Better Financial
Outcomes and Other Measures) Bill 2024
September 2024

Introduction
Treasury Laws Amendment (Delivering Better Financial Outcomes and Other Measures) Bill 2024 (the
Bill) contains six schedules:
• Schedule 1 delivers the first tranche of the Delivering Better Financial Outcomes package, the
Government's response to the Quality of Advice Review.
• Schedule 2 updates the petroleum resource rent tax general anti-avoidance rules so that they align
with the more robust approach of the general anti-avoidance provisions contained in part IVA of
the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936.
• Schedule 3 amends the Petroleum Resource Rent Tax Assessment Act 1987 to clarify the meaning of
the phrase 'exploration for petroleum'. It also clarifies that mining, quarrying or prospecting rights
cannot be depreciated for income tax purposes until they are used, not merely held, and the
circumstances in which the issue of new rights over areas covered by existing rights lead to income
tax adjustments.
• Schedule 4 amends domestic legislation governing Australia's agreements with international
financial institutions to automatically incorporate amendments made to the treaties between
Australia and these institutions. This reflects modern drafting practices and will avoid
administratively burdensome processes, helping Australia honour its commitments to the
international financial institutions that we are a member of.
• Schedule 5 amends various laws in the Treasury portfolio to ensure that those laws operate in
accordance with policy intent, makes minor changes to improve administrative outcomes and
remedies unintended consequences, as well as corrects technical and drafting defects.
• Schedule 6 amends film tax offsets in the Income Tax Assessment Act 1997 to attract international
investment in the Australian screen industry and increases training opportunities on large budget
film productions. It raises the film location tax offset from 16.5 per cent to 30 per cent and
introduces a new producer tax offset for drama series spending $35 million per season.
The Bill passed both Houses on 4 July 2024 and received Royal Assent on 9 July 2024 as the Treasury
Laws Amendment (Delivering Better Financial Outcomes and Other Measures) Act 2024.
The Government thanks the Senate Economics Legislation Committee for its inquiry into the Bill, and
thanks the organisations and individuals who made submissions to the inquiry and participated in the
public hearing.
The Government’s responses to the recommendations made in the Committee’s final report are
provided below. In line with the guidelines on Government responses, recommendations that a bill or
bills be passed, rejected, or amended have not been responded to. This includes the Committee’s
recommendation in the Main Report that the Senate pass the Bill and recommendation 2 in the
Greens Senators' additional comments.
Introduction | 1
Response to the recommendations
Coalition Senators' Dissenting Report
Recommendation 1
That Part 1 Schedule 1 of the Bill be removed and the provisions re-consulted on by the Treasury
in anticipation of Tranche 2 of the Government’s legislation implementing the Quality of Advice
review recommendations.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government tabled Parliamentary Amendments to Part 1 of Schedule 1 in the Senate
following constructive engagement from stakeholders and in response to feedback received on
the Bill. The amendments to the Bill were publicly supported by stakeholders and will support
improved access to financial advice for Australians while maintaining consumer protections.
These amendments were agreed.
Part 1 of Schedule 1 clarifies that Australians can use their superannuation accounts to pay for
personal financial advice from a financial adviser. Superannuation funds will continue to satisfy
their current obligations that govern the usage of member funds.
2 | Response to the recommendations
Greens Senators' additional comments
Recommendation 1
The Australian Government prioritise the introduction of its legislative reforms for local
requirements for streaming services to the Australian Parliament.
Australian Government response
The Government supports this recommendation.
In the National Cultural Policy Revive, the Albanese Labor Government reiterated its election
commitment to introduce Australian screen content requirements on streaming platforms to
ensure continued access to local stories and content.
The Government is undertaking a genuine consultation process and is taking the time to consider
views to support ongoing investment in, and production of, Australian stories. The Government
wants to get the new obligation right and is working through the final details of the Australian
screen content obligation. The Government is aiming to introduce legislation as soon as
practicable. The obligation will be introduced as part of the Australian Government’s broader
reforms to media legislation and is the joint responsibility of the Minister for Communications and
the Minister for the Arts.
Response to the recommendations | 3
