Australian Government response to the
Joint Standing Committee on Treaties Report 218:
Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity Agreement
relating to Supply Chain Resilience
OCTOBER 2024
Response
The Government thanks the Committee for its consideration of the Indo-Pacific
Economic Framework for Prosperity Agreement relating to Supply Chain Resilience.
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that treaty actions are referred to the Joint Standing
Committee on Treaties by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade prior to action
which binds Australia to the terms of the treaty.
Response:
The Government accepts this recommendation and reaffirms that consideration by
JSCOT prior to any binding treaty action being taken is a fundamental component of
Australia’s treaty-making process.
The objective of the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework (IPEF) has been to build treaty-
level undertakings with close trading partners to frame ongoing cooperative activities
on contemporary challenges that have until now not been systematically addressed.
The IPEF Agreement relating to Supply Chain Resilience (the Agreement) makes
provision for signatories, who have yet to ratify, to participate in preparatory work such
as developing the regional bodies established under the Agreement up until
24 February 2025 (12 months after entry into force). Australia has participated in
developing terms of reference for these bodies to ensure they are established with
sensitivity to Australia’s interests. This action is not binding and has been pursued
without prejudice to JSCOT’s prerogative to review and report on the Agreement, prior
to Australia taking binding treaty action.
Recommendation 4
The Committee supports the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity
Agreement relating to Supply Chain Resilience and recommends that binding treaty
action be taken.
Response:
The Government welcomes the Committee’s agreement that binding treaty action be
taken in relation to the Indo-Pacific Economic Framework for Prosperity Agreement
relating to Supply Chain Resilience. Australia has implemented this recommendation
and ratified the Agreement on 12 September 2024.
1
