Australian Government response to the
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee report:
Missing and murdered First Nations women and children
NOVEMBER 2024
1
Help and Support
This response discusses violence against women and children, missing and murdered women
and children, sexual violence and racism.
Free advice and support is available online and via telephone through the following services:
• 1800RESPECT (1800 737 732) is available for free, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week to
support people impacted by domestic, family or sexual violence.
• 13YARN (13 92 76) Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander Crisis Support
• Beyond Blue (1300 22 4636)
• Lifeline crisis support line (13 11 14)
• Kids Helpline (1800 55 1800)
• Mensline Australia (1300 78 99 78)
• Blue Knot Foundation (1300 657 380) 9am to-5pm AEST/AEDT 7 days a week to
support adult survivors of childhood trauma and abuse, parents, partners, family and
friends as well as the professionals who work with them.
• Suicide Call Back Service (1300 659 467)
Acknowledgement
The Australian Government acknowledges and remembers the lives of First Nations women,
children and gender-diverse people who have been disproportionately and violently
disappeared and murdered. We acknowledge the trauma, grief and pain of survivors and also
that of their widespread networks of families, friends and communities of support.
We acknowledge the physical, spiritual, mental, cultural and emotional efforts of those who
have spoken out for and advocated for disappeared and murdered loved ones and those
currently at risk and needing protection. We also acknowledge First Nations communities’
resilience and leadership on this issue and the work of advocates, activists, community
leaders and staff.
We acknowledge the intersectional challenges and compounding disadvantage experienced by
First Nations women and girls and recognise that their roles in families and communities as
caretakers and carrier of culture are central to the development, growth and diversity of
Australian society. We acknowledge structural and intersectional challenges that require
continued transformation of Government organisations, by requiring mainstream
organisations to improve their cultural safety and responsiveness to the needs of First Nations
women and girls. We acknowledge the collective effort and action needed to address this
crisis and the need for a thorough and considered approach on multiple fronts with the
guidance of First Nations people with lived experience.
We acknowledge the First Peoples of this country and recognise their continued connection to
the land and seas that make up Australia. Collectively, we pay our respects to Elders, past and
present. We also pay our respects to all First Nations people with a lived or living experience
of violence and acknowledge the memory of all missing and murdered First Nations people,
and their families, across the country.
Introduction
2
The Australian Government welcomes the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References
Committee’s Inquiry into Missing and Murdered First Nations women and children report
that was tabled on 15 August 2024.
The Australian Government acknowledges that action is required to ensure the safety of all
First Nations women and children in Australia, including action to address the underlying
systemic factors contributing to violence. First Nations women and children experience
disproportionately higher rates of homicide, family, domestic and sexual violence, child
removal and incarceration, and poorer outcomes across health, housing, education and
employment. According to the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) and
Australian Institute of Criminology (AIC) data, First Nations women are 33 times more likely
to be hospitalised1 and up to 7 times more likely to be homicide victims than non-Indigenous
women, with almost 3 quarters killed by their current or former intimate partner.2
Addressing the issue of missing and murdered First Nations women and children requires a
concerted effort, involving all governments. States and territories have primary responsibility
for law enforcement and child protection, including policing and justice system responses to
family, domestic and sexual violence.
The Australian Government is committed to the safety of First Nations women and children
and is providing national leadership on a range of important initiatives to respond to
discrimination, inequality and gender-based violence, particularly through the National
Agreement on Closing the Gap (National Agreement) and the National Plan to End Violence
against Women and Children 2022-32 (National Plan).
The National Plan is a joint Australian, state and territory government document that sets the
national policy agenda for addressing violence against women and children in Australia for
the next 10 years. Through the National Plan, the Australian, state and territory governments
have collectively committed to the vision of ending gender-based violence in one generation.
The National Plan is supported by the dedicated Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Action
Plan 2023-25, the First Action Plan 2023-2027, Activities Addendum to the First Action Plan,
and the Outcomes Framework, setting the roadmap for how the Australian Government will
work to achieve this vision.
Activities under way to support actions include:
• building the capacity of services and systems to provide trauma-informed, connected
and coordinated responses to support victim-survivors, such as through improvements
to the Escaping Violence Payment.
• improving police and justice system responses through initiatives aimed to strengthen
the legal frameworks to ensure victims and survivors have improved justice outcomes
and protections and building justice sector capability to better support and protect
victims and survivors.
• improving access to short-term, medium and long-term housing for women and
children experiencing violence, including those living in institutional settings, and
1 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people - Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (aihw.gov.au) 2
Homicide of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women (aic.gov.au)
3
support women to stay in their own homes when they choose to do so, such as the
national Keeping Women Safe in their Homes initiative which completes risk
assessments, safety planning and security upgrades for women and children
experiencing family and domestic violence so they can stay in their own homes, or a
home of their choice, where it is safe to do so.
• working in formal partnership with First Nations peoples to ensure policies and
services genuinely meet their needs.
The National Plan acknowledges there will be emerging areas of need and emerging forms of
violence that will be addressed over the life of the National Plan. New initiatives and
activities to respond to emerging areas will be captured in annual updates to the First Action
Plan Activities Addendum.
The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Action Plan 2023-2025 (Action Plan), under the
National Plan, addresses current safety needs and lays a strong foundation for long-term
change. The Action Plan was developed by the Department of Social Services (DSS) in
partnership with the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Advisory Council on Family,
Domestic and Sexual Violence (Advisory Council).
A new National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Family Safety Plan (Family Safety Plan)
will provide direction on the future policy approach to addressing the unacceptable rates of
violence against First Nations women and children. A public consultation process is underway,
with the Family Safety Plan due to be launched in June 2025.
On 6 September 2024, National Cabinet confirmed its commitment to maintaining a central
focus on missing and murdered First Nations women and children and agreed that all
governments’ commitments on gender-based violence must explicitly consider the needs and
experiences of First Nations people and be delivered in genuine partnership with First
Nations communities.
The comprehensive $4.7 billion package announced on 6 September 2024 through National
Cabinet harnesses important opportunities to work together to prevent violence and support
legal services. It brings together efforts and funding to:
• deliver much needed support for frontline specialist and legal services, including
responding to gender based violence.
• better identify and respond to high-risk perpetrators to stop violence escalating.
• address the role that systems and harmful industries play in exacerbating violence.
This investment to end gender-based violence goes towards addressing the recommendations
of the Senate Inquiry. This includes:
• $3.9 billion investment in the National Access to Justice Partnership (NAJP), which
includes ongoing funding to the legal assistance sector, including the Family Violence
Prevention Legal Services (FVPLS) services.
• $85 million to respond to high-risk perpetrators to prevent homicide and keep women
safe. This includes funding for trials of innovative models to prevent intimate partner
violence and homicide.
The Government acknowledges the work of the Committee and thanks the many
organisations and individuals who contributed views and evidence throughout the Inquiry.
The Australian Government response to the Report was coordinated by the National
4
Indigenous Australians Agency (NIAA) with input from the Department of the Prime
Minister and Cabinet (PMC) (including the Office for Women), the Attorney-General’s
Department
(AGD), DSS, Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development,
Communications and the Arts (DITRDCA), eSafety Commissioner, the Department of Health
and Aged Care (DOHAC), Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS), AIC, Australian Federal
Police (AFP), the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT), the Department of
Finance (DOF) and the Australian National Audit Office (ANAO).
As suggested by the Committee, the Australian Government has carefully considered and
reflected on the use of terminology in this matter. Throughout this response, the terminology
of ‘missing’ and ‘disappeared’ is interchangeable to maintain consistency with the
terminology of the Inquiry’s terms of reference, but also to demonstrate our respect for First
Nations’ stakeholders who have undertaken outstanding work in relation to the issues
considered in the Report.
5
Table of Contents
Help and Support ................................................................................................................... 2
Acknowledgement ................................................................................................................. 2
Introduction ........................................................................................................................... 2
Table of Contents ................................................................................................................... 6
Summary of Government response to Recommendations .................................................... 7
Abbreviations....................................................................................................................... 12
Australian Government Response to Recommendations .................................................... 13
6
Summary of Government response to Recommendations
Recommendation Response
Recommendation 1 Support in
principle
The committee recommends that federal, state and territory
governments codesign with First Nations families and communities,
and on behalf of all Australians, a culturally appropriate and nationally
significant way in which to recognise and remember the First Nations
women and children who have been murdered or disappeared.
Recommendation 2 Note
The committee recommends that the Attorney-General tasks the Police
Ministers Council to review existing police practices in each
jurisdiction, consider the learnings from each jurisdiction and aim to
implement and harmonise best police practices across Australia by no
later than 31 December 2025, with the goal of ensuring all interactions
with First Nations people are consistent and of a high standard,
including standards of cultural awareness and safety. In performing
this role, the committee recommends that the following practices and
procedures be considered:
• ongoing and mandatory cultural awareness training for all
employees (that is, both sworn and civilian members);
• training courses developed and led by First Nations people,
including components on lived experience, trauma-informed
practice and effective communication;
• recruitment, support and promotion of First Nations people,
including to senior management positions; and
• appropriate guidelines for the review of past cases involving
disappeared and murdered First Nations women and children
where families are seeking review. These should be replicated
through the justice system as recommended by the NSW State
Coroner in the inquest into the death of Mona Lisa Smith and
Jacinta Rose Smith (referred to in this report).
Recommendation 3 Note
The committee recommends that the Senate Legal and Constitutional
Affairs Legislation Committee or the Joint Standing Committee on
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs, or such other appropriate
body, monitors progress in meeting Recommendation 2 and the
progress of measures to address the issues relating to discernible data
gaps (paragraph 7.11).
7
Recommendation 4 Support in
principle
The committee recommends that the Commonwealth government
appoints a First Nations person with specific responsibility for
advocating on behalf of and addressing violence against First Nations
Recommendation Response
women and children within the Domestic, Family and Sexual Violence
Commission. Detailed consideration should be given to the way in
which the position is created within the Domestic, Family and
Sexual Violence Commission (for example, should it be
Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner level), the powers of such
position and the necessary funding for such position to maximise
effectiveness.
Recommendation 5 Support in
principle
The committee recommends that the Australian government urgently
gives effect to the relevant recommendations in the Independent
Review of the National Legal Assistance Partnership 2020–2025, in
particular Recommendations 2–3, 9 and 11–12, and specifically
addresses the need to increase the geographic spread and capacity of
Family Violence Prevention Legal Services.
Recommendation 6 Support in
principle
The committee recommends that the Department of Social Services,
the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Attorney-
General's Department and the National Indigenous Australians Agency
develop, for implementation, a sustainable funding mechanism to
provide ongoing support services for First Nations people, including
women and children, experiencing domestic, family and sexual
violence. This funding must prioritise service and program delivery by
Aboriginal community-controlled organisations who demonstrate
evidence-based primary prevention initiatives that are independently
evaluated for efficacy, including for delivery in regional and remote
areas.
Recommendation 7 Support
The committee recommends that the Australian government empowers
First Nations women to lead the design and implementation of
services and supports that address violence in their communities, as
consistently advocated by the Wiyi Yani U Thangani (Women's
Voices) project, and reflecting the principles contained in the United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People.
8
Recommendation 8 Note
The committee recommends that:
• the Australian National Audit Office (ANAO) gives serious
consideration to auditing the Attorney-General’s Department
(noting the independence of the ANAO), as part of its Annual
Audit Work Program 2025–2026, to assess whether the
department is effectively delivering on the commitments
agreed by the Australian government under the:
Recommendation Response
o National Agreement on Closing the Gap (in particular,
Target 13); o National Plan to End Violence
against Women and
Children 2022–2032; o Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Action Plan
2023–25; o the First Nations National Plan, once
in effect; and
• not later than six months after the conclusion of any ANAO
audit, the Senate directs the Legal and Constitutional Affairs
References Committee or the Joint Standing Committee on
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs to consider the
ANAO's findings and assess the Attorney-General's
Department's response to the audit. In the event that the ANAO
declines to undertake the audit, then another independent body
should be tasked with conducting the audit on the basis
referred to above.
Recommendation 9 Note
The committee recommends that the Australian Press Council
considers and reflects on the evidence given in this inquiry, with
regard to how the media portrays cases of murdered and disappeared
First Nations women and children, and considers how the concerns of
First Nations communities and families can be positively addressed,
including through the introduction of additional Standards or Advisory
Guidelines or amendment of the existing Standards and
Advisory Guidelines.
9
Recommendation 10 Support in
principle
The committee recommends that the Australian government
systematically considers the many recommendations and suggestions
made to this inquiry. This includes recommendations relating to:
• trauma informed healing, including the recommendations made
by the Healing Foundation and White Ribbon Australia;
• implementation of a violence prevention framework for men
and boys;
• development of Aboriginal community-based support programs
for men; and
• initiatives which promote a sense of individual and community
responsibility for the issue of male violence against Aboriginal
women.
Australian Greens Recommendation 1 Note.
That the government urgently acts to provide sufficient funding, See
including through additional National Legal Assistance Partnership Recommendations
support, to deliver and expand First Nations led community services
Recommendation Response
that are able to provide advocacy and support services to assist First 5 and 6 of
Nations women to report incidents of violence and threats of violence majority report
to police in a way they will be both respected and heard.
Australian Greens Recommendation 2 Note.
That the position on the Domestic, Family and Sexual Violence
See
Commission should be that of a Commissioner. Recommendation
4 of majority
report.
Australian Greens Recommendation 3 Note.
That the Australian government works with First Nations communities See
to develop an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander violence
Recommendation
prevention framework for men and boys. 10 of majority
report.
Australian Greens Recommendation 4 Note.
That an alternative body to the Joint Standing Committee on See
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs be developed for
Recommendations
measuring progress regarding the development of harmonised best
2 and 3 of
police practices across federal, state, and territory police forces majority report.
(Recommendation 2 in the majority report).
10
Australian Greens Recommendation 5 Note
That the Australian government works with the United Nations’
existing formal mechanisms for gender and Indigenous rights to
provide international oversight over Australia’s progress on the issue
of missing and murdered First Nations women and children.
Australian Greens Recommendation 6 Note
That the Australian government develops clear, best practice policies
for the timely provision of information, including autopsy results and
coroners’ reports, to the families of missing and murdered women and
children.
Australian Greens Recommendation 7 Note
That the Australian government ensures that specialised resources for
missing persons cases are used, and that cultural safety and
traumainformed protocols are incorporated into police procedures.
Australian Greens Recommendation 8 Note
That the Australian government develops targets around the
elimination of racial profiling and the identification of victims and
perpetrators.
Recommendation Response
Australian Greens Recommendation 9 Note
That the Australian government provides support for First Nations
community services, to provide advocacy to assist First Nations
women to report violence and threats.
Australian Greens Recommendation 10 Note.
That the Australian government clearly defines the data-points that we See
expect from each jurisdiction and places targets on their effective
Recommendation
collection and availability across the network. 3 of majority
report.
Australian Greens Recommendation 11 Note
That the Australian government develops a stand-alone national plan
of action, including best practice policing processes and measurement
against Target 13 of the Closing the Gap agenda.
Australian Greens Recommendation 12 Note
That the Australian government reviews and tables a comprehensive
report detailing the connection between missing and murdered First
Nations women and children and the failure to implement the
outstanding recommendation of the Royal Commission into
Aboriginal Deaths in Custody and Bringing Them Home report.
11
Australian Greens Recommendation 13 Note
That the Australian government publicly commits to fully
implementing the recommendations of the Joint Standing Committee
on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs on the UN Declaration
for the Rights of Indigenous People.
Abbreviations
Abbreviation Definition
Action Plan Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Action Plan 2023-2025
Advisory Council
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Advisory Council on Family,
Domestic and Sexual Violence
ABS Australian Bureau of Statistics
ACCO Aboriginal Community Controlled Organisation
ACT Australian Capital Territory
AFP Australian Federal Police
AGD Attorney-General’s Department
AIC Australian Institute of Criminology
AIHW Australian Institute of Health and Welfare
ANAO Australian National Audit Office
ANZPAA Australia New Zealand Policing Advisory Agency
Convention
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
against Women
DFAT Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
DDMM Data and Digital Ministers Meeting
DOF Department of Finance
DOHAC Department of Health and Aged Care
DITRDCA
Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional Development,
Communications and the Arts
DSS Department of Social Services
FDSV Family, Domestic and Sexual Violence
FVPLS Family Violence Prevention Legal Services
IAS Indigenous Advancement Strategy
12
NACCHO National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation
NAJP National Access to Justice Partnership
Family Safety Plan National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Family Safety Plan
NATSIWA National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Women’s Alliance
National Agreement National Agreement on Closing the Gap
NIAA National Indigenous Australians Agency
Investment Strategy National Child and Family Investment Strategy
NLAP National Legal Assistance Partnership
NSW New South Wales
NT Northern Territory
National Plan
National Plan to End Violence against Women and Children 2022-
32
OFW Office for Women
PMC Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
SA South Australia
SBS Special Broadcasting Service
SNAICC Secretariat of National Aboriginal and Islander Child Care
UNDRIP United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People
VACCA Victorian Aboriginal Child and Community Agency
WA Western Australia
Working for Women Working for Women: A Strategy for Gender Equality
Australian Government Response to Recommendations
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that federal, state and territory governments codesign with
First Nations families and communities, and on behalf of all Australians, a culturally
appropriate and nationally significant way in which to recognise and remember the First
Nations women and children who have been murdered or disappeared.
13
Support in principle
The Australian Government supports actions to respectfully recognise and remember First
Nations women and children that have been murdered or disappeared in Australia and
understands its importance. The Australian Government acknowledges the means of
commemoration may be unique to each grieving family.
The Inquiry heard many ways in which missing and murdered First Nations women and
children could be recognised and remembered, including honouring and commemorating
those loved ones by addressing the systemic causes of violence to ensure that no more First
Nations women and children are murdered or disappeared. The measures discussed in this
response outline the Government’s commitment to action in addressing the systemic causes
of violence.
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that the Attorney-General tasks the Police Ministers Council to
review existing police practices in each jurisdiction, consider the learnings from each
jurisdiction and aim to implement and harmonise best police practices across Australia by
no later than 31 December 2025, with the goal of ensuring all interactions with First
Nations people are consistent and of a high standard, including standards of cultural
awareness and safety. In performing this role, the committee recommends that the
following practices and procedures be considered:
• ongoing and mandatory cultural awareness training for all employees (that is, both
sworn and civilian members);
• training courses developed and led by First Nations people, including components
on lived experience, trauma-informed practice and effective communication;
• recruitment, support and promotion of First Nations people, including to senior
management positions; and
• appropriate guidelines for the review of past cases involving disappeared and
murdered First Nations women and children where families are seeking review.
These should be replicated through the justice system as recommended by the NSW
State Coroner in the inquest into the death of Mona Lisa Smith and Jacinta Rose
Smith (referred to in this report).
Note
The Australian Government recognises the importance of best practice in policing and
acknowledges that the AFP, and state and territory police have progressed reforms to improve
policing systems for First Nations people, including through a range of cultural awareness
training programs for police employees (both sworn and non-sworn).
Whilst the Australian Government does not have responsibility for state and territory police,
including jurisdictional training, recruitment and case review practices and procedures, the
Australian Government is pursuing a range of measures that seek to support states and
territories to promote and implement best practice in policing across all jurisdictions. This
14
includes working with the states and territories to develop a national training and education
package, to enhance the effectiveness of state and territory police responses to family,
domestic and sexual violence. The AFP also provides ongoing cultural awareness training to
its employees, through programs such as the Core Leadership Continuum and SBS Inclusion
Program and is currently developing a Cultural Inclusion Learning Continuum, which will
include a First Nations learning framework to enhance and scale cultural awareness learning
for the organisation.
The Justice Policy Partnership, one of 5 policy partnerships established under the National
Agreement on Closing the Gap, is in the early stages of developing an anti-racism strategy for
the justice system, which is one of its four strategic initiatives.
Through the Police Consultative Group on Missing Persons, the Australian Government has
always and will continue to identify issues where harmonisation of best police practices can
be applied.
The Australian Government will raise this recommendation and work with the states and
territories though the Police Ministerial Council forum but notes that any further action by
jurisdictions requires the agreement of each state and territory.
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation
Committee or the Joint Standing Committee on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Affairs, or such other appropriate body, monitors progress in meeting Recommendation 2
and the progress of measures to address the issues relating to discernible data gaps
(paragraph 7.11).
Note
The Australian Government acknowledges the importance of ensuring any progress in
response to Recommendation 2 is appropriately monitored, noting this is a matter for the
Senate.
The ABS will continue working with state and territory police departments and criminal
justice sector more broadly, to enhance the statistics about First Nations peoples in alignment
with Closing the Gap Targets 10, 11 and 13.
The Australian Government has committed to investing $15 million in a First Nations-led
family, domestic and sexual violence data collection to address the current data gaps in
understanding the prevalence of all types of violence experienced by First Nations women
and children. This will provide new data to report progress on Target 13 of the National
Agreement.
The Performance Measurement Plan of the National Plan identifies key performance
indicators to measure and report on progress over the life of the National Plan. It includes
measures related to police and justice system interactions with First Nations peoples within
the context of responding to family, domestic and sexual violence. Work is being undertaken
to fill data gaps in these measures.
In 2024-25, the AIHW commenced a 2-year program of work on Child Protection National
Minimum Data Set data development with jurisdictions. This work will consider a range of
15
possible enhancements and development opportunities, including the capture of information
related to family and domestic violence.
The Data and Digital Ministers Meeting (DDMM) oversees implementation of National
Cabinet’s Intergovernmental Agreement on data sharing between the Australian Government
and states and territories, which commits all jurisdictions to share public sector data by
default where it is safe, secure, lawful and ethical to do so. DOF supports DDMM and
provides support to PMC, AGD, DSS and other relevant agencies, with advice on best
practice data sharing between the Australian Government and states and territories.
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the Commonwealth government appoints a First Nations
person with specific responsibility for advocating on behalf of and addressing violence
against First Nations women and children within the Domestic, Family and Sexual Violence
Commission. Detailed consideration should be given to the way in which the position is
created within the Domestic, Family and Sexual Violence Commission (for example, should
it be Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner level), the powers of such position and the
necessary funding for such position to maximise effectiveness.
Support in principle
Reform Area One of the Action Plan includes the action to investigate the potential for a
scoping and feasibility study for an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Family, Domestic
and Sexual Violence Commissioner. This scoping will be progressed as part of the
development of the Family Safety Plan, in the context of the First Nations Family, Domestic
and Sexual Violence Peak (a funded action under the Action Plan) and Sector Strengthening
Plan.
The Assistant Domestic, Family and Sexual Violence Commissioner is an identified role, and
is currently responsible for engaging and working alongside First Nations communities in
supporting the role of the Domestic, Family and Sexual Violence Commissioner in the
monitoring and oversight of the National Plan. Monitoring of the progress of the National
Plan includes the Action Plan and will include the Family Safety Plan once completed.
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends that the Australian government urgently gives effect to the
relevant recommendations in the Independent Review of the National Legal Assistance
Partnership 2020–2025, in particular Recommendations 2–3, 9 and 11–12, and specifically
addresses the need to increase the geographic spread and capacity of Family Violence
Prevention Legal Services.
Support in principle
On 6 September 2024, the Australian Government announced an investment of $3.9 billion
for frontline legal assistance services to be delivered through the NAJP, including a critical
16
increase of nearly $800 million over five years, with a focus on uplifting legal services
responding to gender-based violence. The NAJP will commence on 1 July 2025, on the
expiry of the current National Legal Assistance Partnership (NLAP), and will include, for the
first time, Family Violence Prevention Legal Services (FVPLS).
Under the NAJP, FVPLS providers will receive quarantined and additional funding to deliver
critical frontline services to First Nations women and children. The Heads of Agreement also
contains a commitment from all governments to work in partnership over the first 2 years to
develop a Closing the Gap schedule (or similar) with ACCOs.
Final details of the NAJP are being finalised between the Australian Government, states and
territories, in close consultation with the sector.
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends that the Department of Social Services, the Department of the
Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Attorney-General's Department and the National
Indigenous Australians Agency develop, for implementation, a sustainable funding
mechanism to provide ongoing support services for First Nations people, including women
and children, experiencing domestic, family and sexual violence. This funding must
prioritise service and program delivery by Aboriginal community-controlled organisations
who demonstrate evidence-based primary prevention initiatives that are independently
evaluated for efficacy, including for delivery in regional and remote areas.
Support in principle
All parties to the National Agreement (Commonwealth, states & territories, the Coalition of
the Peaks and the Australian Local Government Association) have acknowledged that
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community-controlled led services are better for First
Nations peoples, achieve better results, employ more First Nations peoples and are often
preferred over mainstream services.
This has been supported by the Productivity Commission in its Review of the National
Agreement on Closing the Gap (February 2024) which highlighted services delivered by
ACCOs lead to better outcomes for First Nations peoples.
As announced on 6 September 2024, the Australian Government is investing $3.9 billion in
support for frontline legal assistance services to be delivered through the NAJP, including a
critical increase of nearly $800 million over five years from 2025-26, with a focus on
uplifting legal services responding to gender-based violence.
The NAJP will continue to include quarantined funding for Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Legal Services and, for the first time, will include a quarantined funding stream for
FVPLS. This represents an ongoing funding mechanism for the FVPLS, providing certainty
for these critical ACCOs.
In the 2023-24 Budget, the Australian Government committed $262.6 million to support the
dedicated Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Action Plan and early investment into a
standalone National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Family Safety Plan. This included
$103.4 million of funding through 4 immediate priority grant rounds for crisis
accommodation services, family, domestic and sexual violence programs in ACCOs, men’s
wellness centres, and community prevention campaigns for children that will be delivered by
17
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Organisations around Australia. This supports the longer
term of objective of building the ACCO sector.
The DSS National Child and Family Investment Strategy (Investment Strategy) is supporting
the shift towards adequate and coordinated funding of early, targeted, healing-informed
culturally safe support services that are effective in supporting children and families and
delivered by ACCOs. The Investment Strategy is Activity 2(a) of the Safe and Supported:
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander First Action Plan 2023–2025 and aims to build the
ACCO child and family sector through commissioning investment strategies.
The National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Women’s Alliance (NATSIWA) is one of
the National Women’s Alliances funded under the Working for Women Program to advocate
for women and advise Australian Government policymakers on policies that affect women.
NATSIWA’s key functions include engaging with First Nations women, community and
organisations; providing advice to government including through input to government
inquiries, consultations and policy papers; and collaborating with other Alliances on
intersecting policy issues of priority to First Nations women including family, domestic and
sexual violence. On 29 October 2024, the Minister for Women announced that NATSIWA
will continue to receive funding until 2028-29 as a National Women’s Alliance.
Through the eSafety Commissioner, First Nations organisations have been funded to design
and develop culturally appropriate resources, including videos, to help First Nations
individuals and communities recognise, report and respond to tech-based abuse in a variety of
situations, including in family, domestic and sexual violence.
The Preventing Tech-based Abuse of Women Grants Program, implemented by the eSafety
Commissioner, delivers a total of $10 million in grant funding over at least three rounds. The
intent of the program is to fund projects that focus on the prevention of online harms and
enhanced safety for women and children. This may include projects that target people who
perpetrate tech-based abuse and/or changing norms, attitudes and behaviours in the broader
community.
In 2023, the first round of funding awarded $3 million, and the second round of funding will
be opened in late 2024. Of the $3.5 million in total funding available in Round 2, up to
$600,000 has been set aside to support priority funding of projects that directly target
techbased abuse of women in First Nations communities. This recognises that First Nations
people are more at risk of online hate and serious online harm than non-Indigenous people
and that First Nations women have a higher risk of experiencing family violence.
The Preventing Tech-based Abuse of Women Grants Program and the First Nations funding
stream will also contribute to Recommendation 10 and initiatives which promote a sense of
individual and community responsibility for the issue of male violence against First Nations
women.
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends that the Australian government empowers First Nations women
to lead the design and implementation of services and supports that address violence in their
communities, as consistently advocated by the Wiyi Yani U Thangani (Women's Voices)
project, and reflecting the principles contained in the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of Indigenous People.
18
Support
The Australian Government is committed to progressing meaningful programs and policies
that empower all First Nations peoples and is committed to listening and working in
partnership with First Nations peoples and communities on policies that impact them.
The Australian Government supports the principles underlying the United Nations
Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous People (UNDRIP), which it recognises as an
expression by the international community of respect for the dignity of Indigenous peoples.
The complexity of family, domestic and sexual violence in First Nations communities
requires the inclusion of all community voices, led by First Nations women. This is supported
through Action 7 of the First Action Plan 2023-2027 as well as the Action Plan. The work of
the Wiyi Yani U Thangani (Women’s Voices) Project is a key input that informed the context,
principles and targets of the Action Plan.
The Action Plan was developed through a formal partnership between the Australian
Government and the Advisory Council. The Advisory Council was established in July 2021
and consists of First Nations women and men with expertise in family, domestic and sexual
violence from established First Nations organisations including Victorian Aboriginal Child
and Community Agency (VACCA), SNAICC – National Voice for our Children (SNAICC)
and National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation (NACCHO).
Similarly, an expert Steering Committee which includes 12 First Nations members with
expertise and experience in addressing family and domestic violence, and government
representatives are leading the development of the Family Safety Plan which will be the first
standalone First Nations National Plan to address family, domestic and sexual violence and a
sister-document to the National Plan. SNAICC is providing secretariat support to the Steering
Committee.
The development of the Action Plan and Family Safety Plan have been guided by the voices
and findings of extensive consultation with community that has been led by First Nations
researchers.
The Australian Government released Working for Women: A Strategy for Gender Equality
(Working for Women) on 7 March 2024. Working for Women outlines the Australian
Government’s vision for gender equality – an Australia where people are safe, treated with
respect, have choices, and have access to resources and equal outcomes no matter their
gender.
The Australian Government’s implementation of this Strategy will be guided by six
principles, including a principle that efforts to drive gender equality must be inclusive and
intersectional, and a principle that First Nations Australians must lead efforts to achieve
gender equality for their communities.
There are specific areas identified for action for women that experience heightened barriers to
equality. This includes considering improvements to how the family law system responds to
victim-survivors, including ensuring cultural safety for First Nations victim-survivors.
This Strategy integrates and complements existing efforts across each of its priority areas and
seeks to respond to the needs of First Nations women and girls, while working alongside
actions and frameworks for First Nations gender justice.
19
The Australian Government commits to ensuring First Nations women are central to the
design and implementation of services and supports to address violence in their communities.
This includes, through DOHAC, the implementation of culturally safe, trauma informed, First
Nations led designed and delivered maternal health activities such as Birthing on Country
models of care which provide holistic wrap around services for First Nations women and
infants (which are often inclusive of domestic and family violence support or referral
pathways).
Recommendation 8
The committee recommends that:
• the Australian National Audit Office (ANAO) gives serious consideration to
auditing the Attorney-General’s Department (noting the independence of the
ANAO), as part of its Annual Audit Work Program 2025–2026, to assess whether
the department is effectively delivering on the commitments agreed by the
Australian government under the:
o National Agreement (in particular, Target 13); o National Plan to End
Violence against Women and Children 2022–2032; o Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Action Plan 2023–25; o the First Nations National Plan, once
in effect; and
• not later than six months after the conclusion of any ANAO audit, the Senate
directs the Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee or the Joint
Standing Committee on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Affairs to consider the
ANAO's findings and assess the Attorney-General's Department's response to the
audit. In the event that the ANAO declines to undertake the audit, then another
independent body should be tasked with conducting the audit on the basis referred
to above.
Note
As an independent officer of the Parliament the Auditor-General’s responses to parliamentary
committee recommendations directed to the ANAO are not included as part of the
government response. The ANAO has provided a response to this recommendation directly to
the Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs References Committee.
Recommendation 9
The committee recommends that the Australian Press Council considers and reflects on the
evidence given in this inquiry, with regard to how the media portrays cases of murdered and
disappeared First Nations women and children, and considers how the concerns of First
Nations communities and families can be positively addressed, including through the
introduction of additional Standards or Advisory Guidelines or amendment of the existing
Standards and Advisory Guidelines.
20
Note
The Australian Press Council is an independent organisation. The Minister for Indigenous
Australians, Senator the Hon Malarndirri McCarthy, will write, copying the Minister for
Communications, the Hon Michelle Rowland MP, to the Australian Press Council to ensure it
is aware of this recommendation in the Report.
Recommendation 10
The committee recommends that the Australian government systematically considers the
many recommendations and suggestions made to this inquiry. This includes
recommendations relating to:
• trauma informed healing, including the recommendations made by the Healing
Foundation and White Ribbon Australia;
• implementation of a violence prevention framework for men and boys;
• development of Aboriginal community-based support programs for men; and
• initiatives which promote a sense of individual and community responsibility for the
issue of male violence against Aboriginal women.
Support in principle
The Australian Government welcomes the recommendations and suggestions made by the
inquiry and will consider their implications for policy and program development including in
the development of the standalone Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Family Safety Plan.
On 6 September 2024, National Cabinet agreed several initiatives to better identify high-risk
perpetrators, share information about them across systems and state boundaries, and intervene
earlier to stop violence escalating.
This included development of new national best-practice family and domestic violence risk
assessment principles and a model best-practice risk assessment framework. DSS is leading
delivery of this initiative which involves working in close consultation with a range of
stakeholders. This includes First Nations people and communities, to support specific
consideration of the application of project outputs to this cohort, recognising the unique,
complex and intersecting nature of the ways in which family and domestic violence is
experienced by First Nations peoples.
The Supporting Adolescent Boys Trial is an early intervention program that seeks to provide
tailored support to young men and adolescent boys who have experienced family and
domestic violence to help them recover, heal and avoid choosing to use violence themselves.
One trial site in Broome, Western Australia will be focused on supporting First Nations young
men and boys. A second First Nations dedicated trial site will be established in the Northern
Territory in early 2025. In establishing the trial, providers are encouraged to conduct
consultation within the first 3 months of the grant activity period with local community
members, Elders and cultural authorities, partners and other service organisation to ensure the
trial is delivered in an appropriate way within the trial site.
This approach is aligned with the Action Plan, which recognises that actions to address
gender-based violence should include all men; to create better emotional, spiritual and
cultural wellbeing for men, their families and the community. In addition, First Nations men
21
must be supported to lead healing work with men and boys, empowering them to regain their
dignity, determination, health and wellbeing, and engagement as positive community role
models.
The Australian Government committed $27 million over 5 years (2022-23 to 2026-27) to
work in partnership with state and territory governments to apply innovative approaches to
address family, domestic and sexual violence perpetrator behaviour. Six states and territories
(ACT, NSW, NT, SA, Victoria and WA) are undertaking at least one project (scoping study or
trial) with a focus on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander populations. Projects include
dedicated consideration of the needs and experiences of First Nations communities and are
being developed in collaboration with or led by ACCOs.
Australian Greens Recommendation 1
That the government urgently acts to provide sufficient funding, including through
additional National Legal Assistance Partnership support, to deliver and expand First
Nations led community services that are able to provide advocacy and support services to
assist First Nations women to report incidents of violence and threats of violence to police
in a way they will be both respected and heard.
Note
Please see the Government Response to Recommendation 5 and 6 of the majority report.
Australian Greens Recommendation 2
That the position on the Domestic, Family and Sexual Violence Commission should be that
of a Commissioner.
Note
Please see the Government Response to Recommendation 4 of the majority report.
Australian Greens Recommendation 3
That the Australian government works with First Nations communities to develop an
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander violence prevention framework for men and boys.
Note
Please see the Government Response to Recommendation 10 of the majority report.
Australian Greens Recommendation 4
That an alternative body to the Joint Standing Committee on Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Affairs be developed for measuring progress regarding the development of
22
harmonised best police practices across federal, state, and territory police forces
(Recommendation 2 in the majority report).
Note
Please see the Government Response to Recommendations 2 and 3 of the majority report.
Australian Greens Recommendation 5
That the Australian government works with the United Nations’ existing formal
mechanisms for gender and Indigenous rights to provide international oversight over
Australia’s progress on the issue of missing and murdered First Nations women and
children.
Note
As stated in UNDRIP, all First Nations women and children are entitled to enjoy full
protection and guarantees against all forms of violence and discrimination.
As a party to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (Convention), Australia has an obligation to periodically report on the legislative,
judicial, administrative or other measures adopted in the implementation of the Convention.
Periodic reporting occurs every 4 years and Australia will submit its ninth periodic report to
the Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (Committee) in 2024.
Following submission of the report, Australia will be invited to appear before the Committee
who will seek clarification or elaboration of any issue referred to in the report.
The Australian Government and state and territory governments provide input into the report,
in addition to the Australian Government conducting a public consultation period prior to
submitting the report to the Committee.
Australia engages bilaterally with key countries including the United States and Canada to
discuss these issues in United Nations mechanisms including at the United Nations
Permanent Forum for Indigenous Issues.
Australian Greens Recommendation 6
That the Australian government develops clear, best practice policies for the timely
provision of information, including autopsy results and coroners’ reports, to the families of
missing and murdered women and children.
Note
The Australian Government recognises the importance of autopsy results and coroners’
reports being provided in a timely, culturally safe and trauma informed manner, to support the
families of missing and murdered women and children engage in the justice system.
23
The duties, procedures and reporting requirements of coroners are legislated in each state and
territory. Any reform to legislation or related policies would be a matter for state and territory
governments.
Australian Greens Recommendation 7
That the Australian government ensures that specialised resources for missing persons cases
are used, and that cultural safety and trauma-informed protocols are incorporated into police
procedures.
Note
The Australian Government acknowledges that states and territories have primary
responsibility for missing person cases. Incorporating cultural safety and trauma-informed
protocols into police practices would be a matter for state and territory police, as outlined in
the Government Response to Recommendations 2 and 3 of the majority report.
At the Commonwealth level, the AGD has engaged the Australia New Zealand Policing
Advisory Agency (ANZPAA) as project manager responsible for the development and
implementation of the Family, Domestic and Sexual Violence Law Enforcement Training
Measure. ANZPAA’s ‘Anti-Racism and Cultural Diversity Principles’ will inform both the
development and content of the training.
Australian Greens Recommendation 8
That the Australian government develops targets around the elimination of racial profiling
and the identification of victims and perpetrators.
Note
The Australian Government is developing the Family, Domestic and Sexual Violence Law
Enforcement Training Measure, which will help address identifying both the person in most
need of protection and the primary aggressor to reduce instances of misidentification.
Additionally, the training will address unconscious bias and its impact on policing, and
identifying and managing personal, organisational and societal biases and perceptions. There
is also work underway through the Justice Policy Partnership to develop a national
AntiRacism Strategy for the justice sector, focused on addressing racism against First Nations
peoples.
Australian Greens Recommendation 9
That the Australian government provides support for First Nations community services, to
provide advocacy to assist First Nations women to report violence and threats.
24
Note
Please see the Government Response to Recommendation 6 of the majority report.
Australian Greens Recommendation 10
That the Australian government clearly defines the data-points that we expect from each
jurisdiction and places targets on their effective collection and availability across the
network.
Note
The Australian Government is consulting with states and territories to determine priorities for
addressing gaps, including state and territory level data that can be supplied to establish a
national picture.
Through the AFP led National Missing Persons Coordination Centre there is a continued
commitment to standard data collection on missing persons from states and territory
jurisdictions and the use of that data to derive insights to better inform agency responses.
Please see the Government Response to Recommendation 3 of the majority report.
Australian Greens Recommendation 11
That the Australian government develops a stand-alone national plan of action, including
best practice policing processes and measurement against Target 13 of the Closing the Gap
agenda.
Note
To address Target 13 of the National Agreement, including measures to combat the
prevalence of missing and murdered First Nations women and children, the Australian
Government is committed to delivering the Family Safety Plan. Once delivered in June 2025,
the Family Safety Plan will be a signature piece of policy that will guide a whole of society
approach to addressing the unacceptable rates of violence against First Nations women and
children. Targeted engagement with key Commonwealth agencies will begin shortly to ensure
that achievable actions to implement best practice policing processes and measurement
against Target 13 of the National Agreement are incorporated into the Family Safety Plan.
The AGD is currently working with the states and territories to develop the Family, Domestic
and Sexual Violence Law Enforcement Training Measure for police across all jurisdictions.
The Training Measure will work towards implementing best practice policing processes and
measures against Target 13 of the National Agreement. Where appropriate the Australian
Government will incorporate activities planned for the Training Measure within the Family
Safety Plan, to actively support its development and implementation.
Australian Greens Recommendation 12
That the Australian government reviews and tables a comprehensive report detailing the
connection between missing and murdered First Nations women and children and the
25
failure to implement the outstanding recommendation of the Royal Commission into
Aboriginal Deaths in Custody and Bringing Them Home report.
Note
Consistent with the central finding of the Royal Commission, the Australian Government is
taking a system-wide approach to reducing the unacceptably high number of First Nations
peoples entering prison and youth detention, including through its justice reinvestment
programs.
In the 2022-23 Budget, the Australian Government committed $81.5 million to expand and
establish justice reinvestment initiatives to improve justice outcomes for First Nations
peoples. An additional $10 million over four years was committed in the 2023-24 Budget for
the Justice Reinvestment in Central Australia Program. These investments will enable
communities to design and implement initiatives to reduce contact with the criminal justice
system through prevention, early intervention and rehabilitation.
In addition to the commitment to justice reinvestment, on 21 June 2023, the Australian
Government established a national real-time reporting of deaths in custody dashboard, to
bring additional transparency and accountability to this serious issue. The dashboard can be
accessed on the Australian Institute of Criminology’s website.
The 2018 Deloitte Access Economics Review of the implementation of the Royal
Commission into Aboriginal Deaths in Custody, found that the Commonwealth had fully or
partially implemented 222 of the 223 recommendations for which it was responsible
(including where there was shared responsibility with jurisdictions), with 91 per cent mostly
implemented, and 74 per cent fully implemented.
The Australian Government accepts these findings, and the NIAA continues to work with
partners through its policy and programs to address issues raised by the Royal Commission
relating to reforming the justice system, self-determination, empowerment and the
socioeconomic drivers of crime (housing, jobs, education and health).
Australian Greens Recommendation 13
That the Australian government publicly commits to fully implementing the
recommendations of the Joint Standing Committee on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Affairs on the UN Declaration for the Rights of Indigenous People.
Note
The Australian Government is carefully considering the report and recommendations of the
Inquiry into the application of the UNDRIP in Australia.
26
