Australian Government response to the
Senate Community Affairs References Committee report:
Effective approaches to prevention, diagnosis and support for
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder
December 2024
Overview
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) is the umbrella term used to describe a spectrum of
disorders that can occur when a child has been prenatally exposed to alcohol. The spectrum
covers physical, neurological, behavioural and learning difficulties from mild through to
severe symptoms. Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder is a serious yet preventable disability that
has profound and life-long lasting consequences for affected individuals, families, carers and
communities across Australia.
On 9 September 2019, the Senate Community Affairs References Committee (the
Committee) launched an inquiry into effective approaches to prevention, diagnosis and
support for people living with Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder.
The Australian Government recognises the significant impact Fetal Alcohol Spectrum
Disorder has on individuals living with the disorder and the spectrum of challenges their
carers and families face. It welcomes the Inquiry Report and would like to thank all of those
who provided input into the Inquiry.
The Australian Government is committed to addressing Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder in
Australia through increasing awareness to assist in reducing the prevalence of Fetal Alcohol
Spectrum Disorder and providing the appropriate support to those the impacted by it. This
commitment is supported through the National Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD)
Strategic Action Plan 2018–2028, which outlines a range of priorities and opportunities to
improve the prevention, diagnosis, support and management of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum
Disorder.
More broadly, the Australian Government is committed to preventing and minimising the
harms of alcohol use on all aspects of the Australian community and recognises the
importance of working in partnerships with jurisdictions, community organisations and the
sector to reduce these impacts. This commitment is outlined in the National Alcohol Strategy
2019-2028, which provides a framework of shared responsibility for focusing and
coordinating population-wide and locally appropriate responses to alcohol-related harm,
including action in respect to Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder. Implementation of this
strategy is a shared responsibility of the Australian Government, state and territory
governments and non-government sectors.
A number of the recommendations made in the Report require a collaborative approach
between the Australian Government and jurisdictions whilst other recommendations contain
actions relevant to the non-government sector, such as health professionals and the
education sector. The Australian Government will continue to work with jurisdictions and the
non-government sector to encourage action on recommendations to achieve improved Fetal
Alcohol Spectrum Disorder awareness, education, services and support.
2
The Australian Government Department of Health and Aged Care has prepared this
Australian Government response in consultation with a range of agencies, including: the
Attorney-General’s Department, Australian Institute of Health and Welfare; Department of
Education, Skills and Employment, Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional
Development and Communications and the Arts; Department of Social Services; National
Disability Insurance Agency; National Health and Medical Research Council; National
Indigenous Australians Agency; and The Treasury.
The Australian Government supports 6 recommendations, supports in-principle a further 14
recommendations, and notes 11 of the 32 recommendations. One recommendation is not
supported.
Several of the recommendations do not fall within the remit of the Australian Government.
Where indicated, the Australian Government will engage further with stakeholders in
relation to these recommendations.
3
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the Australian Government provide long-term funding for
the national FASD case register and develop a multi-year strategy and budget for data
collection and related research activities.
Supported-In-Principle
The Australian Government understands the importance of the national Fetal Alcohol
Spectrum Disorder case register.
The Australian Government is funding the national Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder
Australian Registry (the Registry). Funding has been provided since 2016 with the Registry
funded until 2025. Future decisions in relation to the Registry will be considered in the
context of the formal reviews of the National Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD)
Strategic Action Plan 2018-2028.
The first review, at the third year of the Strategic Action Plan has now been completed. This
review found that the recruitment of a researcher to monitor the Registry, supported
through the Government funding, has:
• increased recognition of the Registry by health professionals, improving the
coverage and uptake of the Registry; and
• improved the quality of the data reported by professionals.
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that the Australian Government fund a FASD Prevalence Study
to determine the national prevalence of FASD cases, including both known cases and those
considered ‘at risk’ of FASD in the Australian population.
Supported-In-Principle
The Australian Government acknowledges there is a need to improve national Fetal Alcohol
Spectrum Disorder prevalence data, and notes that improving capacity for screening,
diagnosis and surveillance is an objective under the National Fetal Alcohol Spectrum
Disorder (FASD) Strategic Action Plan 2018-2028.
The Australian Government (Department of Health and Aged Care) is engaging with the
National Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Advisory Group to explore this recommendation
further. This group was established to monitor and report on the progress of the National
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) Strategic Action Plan 2018-2028, and advise the
4
Government on any emerging issues, trends, opportunities and gaps regarding Fetal Alcohol
Spectrum Disorder within Australia.
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the Australian Government in consultation with State and
Territory Governments implement mandatory reporting on standardised data for maternal
alcohol consumption in the Perinatal National Minimum Data Set.
Supported-in-Principle
The Australian Government notes the importance of reporting on standardised data for
maternal alcohol consumption. The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) is
undertaking work on this.
Maternal consumption of alcohol during pregnancy is collected as part of the National
Perinatal Data Collection. The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare uses the National
Perinatal Data Collection to produce reports such as Australia’s Mothers and Babies; and the
National Core Maternity Indicators. The National Perinatal Data Collection includes data
items from the Perinatal National Best Endeavours Data Set (NBEDS) and the Perinatal
National Minimum Data Set (NMDS).
From 1 July 2019, six data items relating to maternal consumption of alcohol during
pregnancy have been included in the Perinatal National Best Endeavours Data Set. The data
items relate to an indicator of alcohol consumption in pregnancy, frequency and number of
standard drinks. Data is collected at two time points in pregnancy: before and after 20 weeks
of gestation.
The Perinatal National Best Endeavours Data Set is intended as an interim standard while
jurisdictions implement data items into their collections and refine data quality. When data
items are assessed as being of high quality, it is expected that the data elements will be
included as data elements in future Perinatal National Minimum Data Sets.
The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare will continue to monitor and report this data
and move to routine reporting once sufficient data quality is available. As at July 2024, seven
states and territories provide data on an indicator of alcohol consumption in pregnancy. This
information is published in the AIHW’s annual Australia’s mothers and babies report.
Frequency of alcohol consumption during pregnancy is provided by six states and territories,
and quantity of alcohol consumption during pregnancy is provided by five states and
territories, with varying levels of completeness. This information has not been published to
date. The status of Perinatal National Best Endeavours Data Set data elements is reviewed
5
on an annual basis as part of routine development in relation to the Perinatal National
Minimum Data Set and National Best Endeavours Data Set.
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the Australian Government fund an independent study into
the social and economic cost of FASD in Australia.
Supported-in-Principle
The Australian Government will consider options to undertake a social and economic study
on the costs of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder, to support ongoing implementation of the
National Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) Strategic Action Plan. The validity of this
study will also depend on the availability of Australian prevalence data to provide an
accurate estimate of the social and economic cost of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (as per
Recommendation 2).
The Australian Government currently funds a range of activities to strengthen the alcohol
evidence base to help inform responses to alcohol use in Australian communities. This
includes high quality research and data analysis to increase awareness and understanding of
the health and social impacts from drinking. National Health and Medical Research Council
(NHMRC) reviewed and updated the Australian guidelines to reduce health risks from
drinking alcohol. Updated guidelines were released in 2020 and included recommendations
in relation to women who are pregnant or breastfeeding.
The National Health and Medical Research Council is the Australian Government’s main
health and medical research funding body. Over the last ten years (2014 to 2023), the
National Health and Medical Research Council has expended funding of $16.1 million in new
grants for research related to Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder. For example, the Targeted
Call for Research in Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder and the establishment of a Centre of
Research Excellence in Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (2016-2020).
The National Health and Medical Research Council continues to welcome research grant
applications from Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder researchers through its standard
research-funding mechanisms.
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends that the Australian Government develop a broader strategy and
budget for a national public education campaign over the life of the National Fetal Alcohol
Spectrum Disorder (FASD) Strategic Action Plan 2018–2028.
6
Supported-In-Principle
An objective of the National Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) Strategic Action Plan
2018-2028 is to ‘increase community knowledge and awareness about the harms and
consequences of drinking during pregnancy or when planning a pregnancy’.
7
Consistent with this objective, the Australian Government (Department of Health and Aged
Care) is funding the Foundation for Alcohol Research and Education (FARE) to deliver a
National Awareness Campaign for Pregnancy and Breastfeeding Women (the Campaign).
The Campaign aims to increase awareness of the risks associated with alcohol consumption
during pregnancy, while planning a pregnancy or breastfeeding, based on the National
Health and Medical Research Council’s 2020 Australian guidelines to reduce health risks from
drinking alcohol. The Campaign provides information and support so women can make
healthy choices during pregnancy, while planning a pregnancy and while breastfeeding. The
Campaign is being delivered through four streams: a mainstream campaign to the general
public; priority groups such as women at higher risk of alcohol exposed pregnancies; health
professionals; and First Nation communities. ‘Every Moment Matters’, the mainstream
component of the Campaign, launched on 30 November 2021, and is being advertised on
TV, radio stations and other social media platforms across Australia. Initial feedback has
shown that the majority of people surveyed were motivated to not drink alcohol, or to
support their partners not to drink alcohol, when pregnant, trying to get pregnant, or
breastfeeding.
The Campaign will be subject to a formal evaluation, expected in late 2024. The formal
evaluation of the Campaign will help to inform any future decisions regarding national public
education campaigns over the term of the National Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD)
Strategic Action Plan 2018-2028.
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends that the Department of Health fund the development of FASD
education resources to be used in secondary school curriculums.
Noted
The Australian Government recognises the importance of targeted Fetal Alcohol Spectrum
Disorder education efforts.
The Australian Government funds the University of Sydney’s Matilda Centre to administer
the acclaimed Positive Choices website, available at: https://positivechoices.org.au/. This
website provides Australian secondary schools and communities, including teachers and
parents, with access to evidence-based and peer reviewed alcohol and other drug
information and education resources.
Positive Choices was informed by input from teachers, parents and students across Australia,
and was developed in collaboration with expert researchers. It links teachers to over 18
evidence-based teaching programs. Positive Choices undertakes ongoing marketing and
promotional activities aimed at teachers and school staff across Australia to encourage
usage of the portal.
8
Whilst there is currently limited content in respect to Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder on
Positive Choices, the Department of Health and Aged Care will explore options to include
additional relevant content, where appropriate. It is important to note that the
implementation of content in school curriculums is a decision for State and Territory
Governments and school education authorities. Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder is not
specifically mentioned in the nationally agreed Australian Curriculum, however drug and
alcohol related issues are addressed through the Health and Physical Education Learning
Area.
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends that the Australian Clinical Practice Guidelines: Pregnancy care
are updated as a matter of priority to ensure consistency with the 2020 Australian guidelines
to reduce health risks from drinking alcohol.
Supported
The Australian Clinical Practice Guidelines: Pregnancy care (now known as the Australian
Pregnancy Care Guidelines) were developed to support health care professionals to provide
high quality, evidence-based care to pregnant women. Topics covered include routine
physical examinations, screening tests and social and lifestyle advice for pregnant women
without complications.
The Pregnancy Care Guidelines are being updated as living guidelines by the Australian
Living Evidence Collaboration (Monash University). In May 2022, the alcohol chapter of the
Australian Pregnancy Care Guidelines was updated to direct health professionals to
Guideline 3 of the Australian guidelines to reduce health risks from drinking alcohol.
In October 2023, a draft recommendation ‘Provide advice not to consume alcohol during
pregnancy, or around the time of conception, to prevention potential harm to the
developing baby’ was published. This recommendation, which aligns with the 2020
Australian guidelines to reduce health risks from drinking alcohol, received NHMRC approval
in June 2024.
New Australian Postnatal Care Guidelines are also being developed. The recommendation
‘Provide advice not to consume alcohol while breastfeeding, to prevent potential harm to
the baby’ is included and was approved by NHMRC in June 2024.
The updated recommendations are available online to guide clinical practice.
Recommendation 8
9
The committee recommends that the medical profession, including the various medical
colleges, acknowledge the critical role they play in education and awareness-raising of the
dangers of consumption of alcohol for both women and men, particularly as it relates to
consumption in relation to pregnancy.
Supported-In-Principle
The Australian Government acknowledges the critical role that medical professionals play in
education and awareness-raising of the risks of alcohol consumption for both men and
women generally, and particularly in relation to pregnancy.
The Australian Government notes that while medical colleges are autonomous,
selfaccrediting institutions who are responsible for the content and quality of their courses,
the Department of Health and Aged Care regularly engages with medical colleges and the
medical profession to raise awareness of alcohol-related harms and the use of relevant
guidelines and diagnostic and screening tools.
The Department of Health and Aged Care funds a number of projects that create useful
resources for health professionals. This includes the Education Package and Training Grant
for GPs in Drug and Alcohol Addiction. This was a time limited program announced as part of
the 2018-19 Budget measure: Preventive Health – support for alcohol and drug abuse.
Funding of $8 million was provided to both GP colleges (the Royal Australian College of
General Practitioners (RACGP) and the Australian College of Rural and Remote Medicine
(ACRRM)) to develop training packages and provide incentive payments to GPs who
complete the training, rewarding GPs for upskilling in the treatment of alcohol and other
drugs. The program was delivered by the RACGP until February 2023 and will continue to be
delivered by ACRRM until February 2024.The Alcohol & Other Drugs (AOD) GP Education
Resource Library was also developed by the RACGP as part of this program. It includes the
Alcohol and other drugs use in pregnancy online module, which is freely available on the
RACGP website and contains practical tips, guidelines and resources relating to the effects of
alcohol and other drugs during the childbearing years. The resource library also has a whole
of practice focus, with resources tailored to practice nurses, allied health workers, and
practice staff.
As part of the health professional stream of the National Awareness Campaign for Pregnancy
and Breastfeeding Women, resources, training and tools will be developed for use in clinical
and professional settings to encourage and facilitate health professionals to initiate
conversations about alcohol consumption and alcohol-related harm during pregnancy, when
planning a pregnancy and when breastfeeding.
In addition, the Department of Health and Aged Care provides funding to the FASD Hub
Australia, which is a central repository for information regarding Fetal Alcohol Spectrum
Disorder. The Hub is aimed at clinicians, researchers and policy makers and includes a series
of e-learning modules to support health professionals to understand the risks of maternal
alcohol consumption, identify and diagnose Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder, and support
10
families and individuals after a Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder diagnosis. The e-learning
modules are available from www.fasdhub.org.au.
Recommendation 9
The committee recommends that the Australian Government provide funding for
professional development training for all health professionals involved in antenatal care, in
order to embed routine FASD screening practices and tools, including AUDIT-C.
Supported-In-Principle
The Australian Government (Department of Health and Aged Care) has funded a series of e-
learning modules for health professionals as part of the development of the Australian Fetal
Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Diagnostic Tool (the Tool). This includes a module on assessing
prenatal alcohol exposure, with specific content on assessing alcohol use in pregnancy, using
the Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test – Consumption (AUDIT-C). The AUDIT-C involves
25 questions which provide a standardised method for the assessment of maternal alcohol
use. Calculation of the AUDIT-C score, although not essential for diagnosis, allows the
clinician to categorise the level of fetal risk associated with maternal drinking. The e-learning
modules are available from www.fasdhub.org.au.
In addition, the Australian Government (Department of Health and Aged Care) has funded
the University of Queensland to undertake a review and update of the Tool to ensure it is in
line with clinical and international best practice. The review will include revised e-learning
modules for health professionals on the use of the Tool and the importance of regular
discussions with patients on the risks of alcohol consumption during pregnancy, while
planning a pregnancy and while breastfeeding. The review is due for completion in late
2024.
The Australian Government will continue to encourage the medical and other relevant
professions to embed educational resources and screening tools into routine practice in
antenatal care.
Recommendation 10
The committee recommends that the Australian Government implement as a matter of
priority marketing, pricing and taxation reforms as set out in the National Alcohol Strategy
2019–2028.
Noted
The Australian Government is committed to preventing and minimising alcohol-related
harms through the overarching framework of the National Alcohol Strategy 2019-2028 (the
Strategy). Implementation of the National Alcohol Strategy 2019-2028 is a shared
11
responsibility between the Australian Government, State and Territory governments and a
range of non-government sectors.
One of the priorities in the National Alcohol Strategy 2019-2028 is ‘managing availability,
price and promotion’, which identifies several policy options to minimise the promotion of
risky drinking behaviours and other inappropriate marketing, and potential pricing and
taxation reforms to reduce risky alcohol consumption. The Australian Government continues
to actively consider potential policy options to prevent and minimise alcoholrelated harms.
In respect to taxation, the Australian Government continues to monitor and assess the
suitability of Australia’s tax settings to ensure they contribute to balanced economic and
social outcomes. It considers the current taxation settings for alcohol are appropriate and is
not currently considering large scale changes.
Recommendation 11
The committee recommends that the Australian Government run a specific public education
campaign with respect to the roll-out of mandatory pregnancy warning labels.
Supported-In-Principle
The Australian Government recognises the value of increasing community awareness of
mandatory pregnancy warning labels on alcoholic beverages. From 31 July 2023, packaged
alcoholic beverages in Australia and New Zealand must display a pregnancy warning label
with prescribed style, font and colours to advise ‘alcohol can cause lifelong harm to your
baby’. These labels inform pregnant women and the broader community that the advice for
pregnant women is to not consume alcohol during pregnancy.
The Australian Government (Department of Health and Aged Care) has developed ‘Your
Healthy Pregnancy’ resources. These resources were supported by a social media campaign
and provide guidance and simple tips for healthy eating and advising not to drink alcohol
during pregnancy.
In addition, the Australian Government is providing $32.4 million over six years (from 2019)
to the Foundation for Alcohol Research and Education to deliver the ‘Every Moment Matters’
Campaign. The Campaign aims to increase Australian’s awareness of the risks associated
with alcohol consumption during pregnancy and while breastfeeding, including Fetal Alcohol
Spectrum Disorder. The Campaign also aims to increase the proportion of Australians who
are aware alcohol should not be consumed during pregnancy and that it is safest not to
drink alcohol when breastfeeding.
The Australian Government will continue to identify opportunities to include messaging on
abstaining from alcohol during pregnancy, while planning a pregnancy and while
breastfeeding and for the new mandatory labelling in any future campaigns related to
pregnancy and health.
12
Recommendation 12
The committee recommends that the Australian Government fund a National Prevention
Strategy to be developed and delivered in collaboration with State and Territory
Governments.
Supported-In-Principle
Preventive health is a key priority for the Australian Government. The National Preventive
Health Strategy 2021-2030 focuses on system wide, evidence-based approaches to reducing
poor health and improving wellbeing at all stages of life. The National Preventive Health
Strategy 2021-2030 provides the overarching, long-term approach to prevention in Australia
and builds on other strategic work that has already been developed, or is currently being
drafted, such as the National Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) Strategic Action Plan
2018-2028. A key focus area of the National Preventive Health Strategy 2021-2030 is
“Reducing alcohol and other drug harm”, which aims to build on Australia’s long-standing
harm minimisation framework. The Australian Government, and state and territory
governments, have commenced implementation activities to support the National
Preventive Health Strategy 2021-2030.
The Australian Government (Department of Health and Aged Care) in collaboration with
States and Territories has developed the National Alcohol Strategy 2019–2028 and the
National Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) Strategic Action Plan 2018–2028, which
both highlight the importance of prevention.
Recommendation 13
The committee recommends that the Australian Government undertake a national audit of
current FASD diagnostic services and funding to identify priority areas and inform a
longerterm and sustainable funding model.
Supported-In-Principle
The Australian Government acknowledges the complexity and importance of Fetal Alcohol
Spectrum Disorder diagnostic services.
A review of the National Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) Strategic Action Plan
20182028 was undertaken at the three-year mark after its implementation, with support
from the National Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Advisory Group. The review addressed a
range of evaluation questions to inform future decisions about diagnostic service funding
models and priority areas.
The review found that progress has been made in providing opportunities for frontline
professionals to increase their Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder knowledge, screening and
diagnostic skills. This included recent activities to:
13
• support the development of the first Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder university
course, run through the University of Western Australia;
• develop resources to upskill health professionals through the National Awareness
Campaign for Pregnancy and Breastfeeding Women;
• establish the Australian and New Zealand Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Clinical
Network; and
• research projects aiming to support clinicians to diagnose and support clients with
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder, for example the Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder
Diagnostic Services and Models of Care Project.
Through the Australian Government’s Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Diagnostic Services
and Models of Care Project, additional funding has been allocated to Fetal Alcohol Spectrum
Disorder diagnostic services to improve capacity for screening, diagnosis and surveillance.
Available in select sites, the Project has proven to be successful in providing improved access
to Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder services in Australia.
In addition, through the 2023-24 Federal Budget, the Australian Government is providing
additional funding of more than $3 million over two years (from 2023-24) to support the
delivery of FASD diagnostic services throughout Australia.
Future considerations identified through the implementation review of the National Fetal
Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) Strategic Action Plan 2018-2028 include:
• greater emphasis on training for all healthcare services in recognising signs of Fetal
Alcohol Spectrum Disorder, referral, diagnosis, models of care and management
strategies;
• ensuring communities with limited resources still have effective models of care
following a Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder diagnosis;
• greater emphasis on screening and diagnosis in education and criminal justice
settings.
Recommendation 14
The committee recommends that the Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) Review Taskforce
recommends including MBS Items that cover the range of clinical practices involved in FASD
assessments, diagnoses, and treatments.
Noted
The Australian Government acknowledges the importance of Medicare rebates to support
increased diagnostic and treatment activity for Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder.
At present, patients who have been diagnosed with, or are suspected of having, Fetal
Alcohol Spectrum Disorder can access a range of Medicare Benefits Schedule items, such as
14
general time-tiered consultation items, used by General Practitioners and specialists to
support Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder assessments, diagnoses and treatments.
The Australian Government (Department of Health and Aged Care) Medicare Benefits
Schedule Review Taskforce completed its five-year review of the Medicare Benefits Schedule
in 2020. The Medicare Benefits Schedule Review Taskforce made several recommendations
consistent with this recommendation. Specifically, the Taskforce recommended clarifying the
use of existing paediatric and psychiatric Medicare Benefits Schedule items, and associated
allied health service items, so that they expressly include the assessment and treatment of
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder and increasing eligibility age limits for these items from
under 13 years to under 25 years.
These changes were implemented on 1 March 2023.
Recommendation 15
The committee recommends that the Australian Government fund:
- an evaluation of tiered models of assessment and use of technology to improve
accessibility to diagnostic services, including in rural and remote communities; and
- the implementation of a trial for a model of tiered FASD assessment utilising primary
health care services.
Supported-in-Principle
The Australian Government recognises the importance and availability of alternative models
for improved utilisation of primary health care services in the assessment and diagnosis of
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder. The Australian Government notes the importance of Fetal
Alcohol Spectrum Disorder diagnosis being made more widely available within the
community, particularly in rural and remote areas.
The Australian Government (Department of Health and Aged Care) supports a range of
research initiatives to improve the health of all Australians. For example, the Health and
Medical Research Office administers the Medical Research Future Fund (MRFF). The MRFF
offers the opportunity to strategically fund research and address national priorities through
its focus on priority-driven research. These priorities are addressed through open and
competitive grant opportunities; and the objectives of these grants may align with the priority
to strengthen the specialised end of diagnostic services. In particular, the MRFF’s Primary
Health Care Research Initiative, which will provide $100 million over 10 years from 2024-25,
aims to increase Australia’s evidence base in primary health care through research to
improve service delivery and patient outcomes and translate this knowledge into action. The
funding for this initiative will support projects that enhance equity of access to high quality
primary health care through digital health innovation and that help patients to monitor and
control their own health care, support continuity of care and enable health care providers
and patients to communicate in innovative and timely ways. Funding decisions under this
15
Initiative will be driven by meaningful engagement with end users, such as patients,
clinicians and health service providers, to address specific needs of Australian populations,
including those in rural or remote locations.
The Australian Government (Department of Health and Aged Care) has funded Griffith
University $2.7 million (over five years, from 2019) to pilot a tiered, culturally responsive
approach to screening, diagnosing and supporting neurodevelopmental delays, including
FASD, in primary care. The Project aims to test a less time-intensive and culturally sensitive
neurodevelopmental assessment and support process that can be implemented by a range
of professionals in community settings, including remote First Nations communities.
Following on from this work, the Department of Health and Aged Care through the MRFF ‘s
Rapid Applied Research Translation Initiative awarded Griffith University $5 million (over five
years from 2024) for a large-scale translational grant which extends its work on support and
diagnosis for children and adolescents with neurodevelopmental disorders, including FASD.
The project aims to enable rapid uptake of a holistic child health and development
monitoring software, ‘Tracking Cube’, for use in First Nations primary health care and the
boarder primary health care sector.
Recommendation 16
The committee recommends that the Australian Government allocate funding for FASD
diagnostic training, including:
- for the expansion of the delivery of practical training courses provided by clinical
services; and for scholarships and/or subsidies to increase the number of
practitioners with a Graduate Certificate in the Diagnosis and Assessment of Fetal
Alcohol Spectrum Disorders (FASD).
Noted
The Australian Government notes the value in Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder diagnostic
training being embedded in training for a range of health professionals.
In 2016, the Australian Government supported the development of an Australian Guide to
the diagnosis of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (the Guide). The Guide was produced to
assist Australian health professionals with standardised diagnostic resources on Fetal Alcohol
Spectrum Disorder. This resource is available from www.fasdhub.org.au.
In 2020, the Department of Health and Aged Care funded the University of Queensland to
undertake a review of the Guide to align it with international and clinical best practice. This
project is due to be finalised in late 2024.
In 2017, the Australian Government funded Patches Paediatrics to deliver a Fetal Alcohol
Spectrum Disorder Diagnostic and Models of Care project. This project included the
development of a graduate certificate in the assessment and diagnosis of Fetal Alcohol
16
Spectrum Disorder. This graduate certificate is being delivered through the University of
Western Australia.
In addition, the Department of Health and Aged Care provides funding to the FASD Hub
Australia (the Hub), which is a central repository for information regarding Fetal Alcohol
Spectrum Disorder aimed at clinicians, researchers and policy makers. The Hub includes a
series of e-learning modules to support health professionals to understand the risks of
maternal alcohol consumption, identify and diagnose Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder, and
support families and individuals after a Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder diagnosis. The
elearning modules are available from www.fasdhub.org.au.
The Australian Government notes that while training institutions are autonomous,
selfaccrediting and responsible for the content and quality of their courses, the Australian
Government (Department of Health and Aged Care) regularly seeks opportunities to engage
with health professionals to raise awareness of alcohol-related harms and the use of
relevant guidelines and diagnostic and screening tools. Further, the Department of Health
and Aged Care funds a variety of projects that aim to create useful resources on a range of
health-related matters for health professionals.
Recommendation 17
The committee recommends that Australian universities ensure that FASD modules are
included in university curriculums for relevant occupations, including those for education and
teaching, medicine, midwifery, psychology, social work, occupational therapy, speech and
language pathology.
Noted
The Australian Government notes the importance of workforce capacity and primary health
care involvement in Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder assessments and referrals and is
committed to a quality tertiary education sector to assist with this.
The Australian Government notes that universities are autonomous, self-accrediting
institutions and therefore responsible for the content and quality of their courses. While the
Australian Government does not intervene directly in the day-to-day operations of
universities, universities are required to meet the Higher Education Standards Framework
(Threshold Standards) 2021. This sets out the minimum standards universities must meet to
ensure quality and integrity in the delivery of higher education. Universities must meet
criteria for teaching—including course design, staffing, resources and educational support—
irrespective of whether courses are delivered online or on campus.
The Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Agency (TEQSA) regulates the higher education
sector and it provides self-accrediting authority to higher education providers. This means
that universities are responsible for their own course offerings and the content of each unit
of study. Unlike schools, universities do not have a consistent curriculum across the sector.
The Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Agency ensures the quality of individual
17
offerings in line with the Threshold Standards but it does not have any legislative remit to
specify content.
The accrediting body of any one profession is responsible for determining the minimum
professional standards or requirements for accreditation. The Australian Government has no
authority to mandate the content of higher education courses but will look for opportunities
when engaging with accrediting bodies to enquire about their minimum requirements in
relation to Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder.
Recommendation 18
The committee recommends that the Australian Government allocate funding for a project to
disseminate the Australian guide to the diagnosis of FASD immediately following its revision
and to train health professionals in its use.
Supported
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
The Australian Government is funding the University of Queensland to undertake a review
and update of the Australian Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Diagnostic Tool to ensure it is
in line with clinical and international best practice. This project is expected to be finalised by
late-2024 and will include broad national dissemination and training activities for the
updated Australian Guide to the Diagnosis of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder.
The project will include revision of e-learning modules and provide training to health
professionals on the use of the Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Diagnostic Tool. This will
raise awareness among health professionals of the importance of regularly initiating
discussions with patients on the risks of alcohol-consumption during pregnancy, while
planning a pregnancy and while breastfeeding.
In addition, the health professional stream of the National Awareness Campaign for
Pregnancy and Breastfeeding Women highlights available resources such as the Australian
Guide to the Diagnosis of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder and includes additional resources,
training and tools for use in clinical and professional settings.
Recommendation 19
The committee recommends that the National Disability Insurance Agency implement
improvements to the Early Childhood Early Intervention program to streamline access and
documentary evidence requirements.
18
Supported
Since December 2020, the National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA) has been
progressively resetting the Early Childhood Early Intervention Approach in the NDIS so that it
reflects contemporary best practice in early childhood approaches and supports children to
participate meaningfully in the key environments in their lives.
The National Disability Insurance Agency’s Early Childhood Approach is designed to support
each child and their family to build their capacity, and supports greater inclusion in
community and everyday settings, with the child’s parents, carers, family members and
educators playing an important role. This approach applies to all children with disability and
those with developmental delay, regardless of the nature of their disability.
The National Disability Insurance Agency early childhood partners have teams of
professionals with experience and expertise in working with children with developmental
delay or disability and their families. They focus on connecting children to family-centred
supports and will assist families to apply for access to the NDIS for their child where this is
required.
The National Disability Insurance Agency directly supports children and their families in
remote and very remote areas of Australia to access the NDIS.
The NDIA is testing a new remote evidence of developmental delay form to support services
in remote and very remote Australia to provide the required evidence to demonstrate that a
child may be eligible for the NDIS. This has been developed in partnership with community
in recognition of the workforce and remoteness challenges.
The Government is committed to working in partnership with those with lived experience of
disability through the Independent Advisory Council and disability representatives, on
progressive improvements to the early childhood approach. The NDIA is undertaking
comprehensive co-design process with the disability community and, where appropriate,
this process will consider and incorporate the new Early Childhood Approach.
Recommendation 20
The committee recommends that the National Disability Insurance Agency ensure that the
planned Early Childhood Early Intervention Reset focus on improving access to support for
children throughout key developmental stages.
Supported
The Australian Government recognises that the support needs of children change as they
move through different developmental stages and is working towards a future National
Disability Insurance Scheme that is more consistent, fair and equitable and improves
outcomes for eligible young children and their families and caregivers.
19
The National Disability Insurance Agency is focussed on enhancing the Early Childhood
Approach, differentiated from the general National Disability Insurance Scheme. This
enables eligible children to receive the right level and mix of support for the right period of
time (including more emphasis on early supports and transitions) through a family-centred
approach aligned with best practice. It includes supporting eligible young children through
the Early Childhood Approach for longer, by increasing the age limit from under seven to
under nine years of age from mid- 2023.
Under the Early Childhood Approach, children and their families and caregivers receive a
range of supports from the National Disability Insurance Agency early childhood partners,
including early connections and early supports. Early connections are for children younger
than seven with delays in their development or with disability and provides access to
supports regardless of whether the child is eligible for the National Disability Insurance
Scheme. Early childhood partners may recommend early supports for children younger than
six with developmental concerns. Early supports are designed to build capacity for children
and families and caregivers to promote everyday learning.
The range of supports and services are different for every child in the Early Childhood
Approach because they are based on individual needs, including each child’s unique
circumstances, and important transitions in a child’s or family’s life.
Recommendation 21
The committee recommends that the Australian Government include FASD in the List of
Recognised Disabilities.
Not Supported
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder is not currently on the List of Recognised Disabilities (the
List). The List and the conditions on it are longstanding and no new conditions have been
added since 2006.
The List, under the Disability Care Load Assessment (Child) Determination, is used as a
qualification tool for Carer Allowance (child) only. The List does not have broader use. There
are two stages in assessing the care receiver for Carer Allowance (child). Firstly, the child is
assessed against the List. If a child’s condition is included on the List their carer will be
granted Carer Allowance (child). This reduces the complexity of the claim process and is a
fast-track method for qualification.
Many conditions vary in severity and in the amount of additional care required to support an
individual child. For this reason, some conditions, including Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder,
are not included on the List. Government policy is for each individual to be assessed based
on the care provided to determine their eligibility. This does not mean the carer cannot
qualify for Carer Allowance (child), or that the child does not require additional care.
20
Qualification is dependent on an appropriate assessment of the severity of the condition
and the level of care provided.
The Australian Government notes that access to Carer Allowance (child) can be met by
demonstrating a child has a disability or medical condition and the carer provides a
qualifying level of care.
Recommendation 22
The committee recommends that the eligibility requirements for the Disability Support
Pension be reviewed to include individuals with FASD with an IQ above the low range
(between 70 and 85).
Noted
The Australian Government notes that eligibility for the Disability Support Pension is based
on a person’s level of functional impairment and work capacity; it is not based on medical
diagnosis or specific medical conditions alone.
Therefore, the Disability Support Pension eligibility criteria already accounts for a person
whose functioning has been impacted due to Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder. People with
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder, who have an intellectual disability where supporting
medical evidence clearly indicates an IQ of less than 70, may qualify for a manifest grant of
Disability Support Pension, which means they can be granted Disability Support Pension
without further assessment. People with Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder who are not
considered manifest but have an IQ score of 70 to 85 can be assessed under Table 9 –
Intellectual Function or Table 7 – Brain Function or another Table that is relevant to their
impairment, under the Social Security (Tables for the assessment of work-related impairment
for Disability Support Pension) Determination 2023. The Guide to Social Security Law was
amended following a recommendation from the 2015 Inquiry into the harmful use of alcohol
in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities to state people with Fetal Alcohol
Spectrum Disorder who do not have a low IQ could be assessed under Table 7.
Recommendation 23
The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State and Territory
Governments to provide all educators with professional development training in the
awareness, understanding and management of FASD.
Noted
The Australian Government (Department of Education) recognises the need for teachers to
have access to high-quality professional learning focused on improving student outcomes
and aligned to the Australian Professional Standards for Teachers (the Teacher Standards).
21
The Teacher Standards provide a nationally agreed quality assurance mechanism against
which teachers can be assessed to ensure they have the competencies required to be
effective educators and which guides their teaching practice. Note the Teacher Standards
apply to registered teachers in early childhood education and care settings, though
registration is not consistently required in all early childhood settings in the Australian
Capital Territory, Northern Territory, Queensland and Tasmania.
The Teacher Standards are a public statement of what constitutes teacher quality and define
what teachers should know and be able to do at different stages across their careers
(Graduate, Proficient, Highly Accomplished and Lead). These include several requirements
for educators to fully understand and meet the needs of their students. For example, Focus
Area 1.6 of the Graduate Standards requires teachers to demonstrate broad knowledge and
understanding of legislative requirements and teaching strategies that support participation
and learning of students with disability. Focus Area 4.4 specifies that teachers must maintain
student safety and be aware of strategies that support students’ wellbeing and safety within
the school and/or system, curriculum, and legislative requirements. However, the standards
do not specify program content.
Responsibility for setting priorities for teacher professional learning sits with state and
territory teacher regulatory authorities, government and non-government education
departments, schools and their teaching staff.
As a part of the Australian Government’s implementation of the recommendations from the
2020 Review of the Disability Standards for Education 2005, the Australian Institute for
Teaching and School Leadership has completed a project to map the Teacher Standards (as
well as other key national teaching and teacher education policies) against the Disability
Standards for Education. This project included analysis of the extent to which these
frameworks support teachers to develop the skills they need to support school students
with disability.
Based on the project, the Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership has
developed resources to support teachers and school leaders understand and apply the
Disability Standards for Education.
The primary role of the Australian Government in the early childhood sector is to provide
financial assistance to families, mainly as subsidies through the childcare system. The
Australian Government is not an employer in the early childhood sector, and professional
development is the responsibility of employers.
The National Quality Framework provides a national approach to regulation, assessment and
quality improvement for early childhood education and care services across Australia. As
part of the National Quality Framework, early childhood services are required to provide an
educational program that enhances each child’s learning and development, and to develop
respectful relationships with families to support children’s inclusion, learning and wellbeing.
All governments collaborated with the sector to co-design a new 10-year National Children’s
22
Education and Care Workforce Strategy, released by the Australian Children’s Education and
Care Quality Authority on 13 October 2021. The Workforce Strategy aims to support the
recruitment, retention, sustainability, and quality of the early childhood services workforce.
Implementing the Workforce Strategy is a collective responsibility between governments
and the sector, as no single stakeholder group can be responsible for all the actions.
An implementation plan to guide collaboration between all stakeholders to achieve the
Workforce Strategy’s aims was released in September 2022. The implementation and
evaluation plan commits all governments and the sector to progressing the Strategy’s 21
actions as a priority. The plan outlines implementation steps for each action and how
progress will be monitored and managed.
One of the actions in the Workforce Strategy is to improve access to an increasing range of
micro-credentials for educators and teachers in areas of identified need, including educating
and caring for children with additional needs. Subject to this action being taken forward in
the implementation plan, consideration will be given to the inclusion of other priority
subject areas such as Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder and other areas identified by the
sector into the range of recognised micro-credentials training.
Furthermore, the Australian Government (Department of Health and Aged Care) funds the
FASD Hub Australia, which provides access to online Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder
learning packages, face-to-face training, workshops, seminars and conferences conducted by
different government and non-government organisations across Australia. The Department
of Health and Aged Care is also funding the University of Sydney’s Matilda Centre, to
develop a suite of teacher and education setting resources. These resources, launched in
March 2022, aim to build the capacity of the education workforce (teachers, support staff
and mentors) to identify, engage with, and support students with Fetal Alcohol Spectrum
Disorder to ensure they have access to equal education opportunities. The suite is a national
resource is being promoted to State and Territory education departments.
The Australian Government (Department of Health and Aged Care) also funds the National
Organisation for Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (NOFASD) to develop ‘Through Different
Eyes’, a guide and accompanying resource suite for people working in early childhood
education settings. The guide aims to support educators to identify children who potentially
have Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder, to build the capacity of educators to assist children
with Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder, and to encourage positive outcomes for children and
their families.
Recommendation 24
The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with State and Territory
Governments to ensure all schools can deploy and resource FASD-specific strategies and
assistance to support educators and to support students with FASD and suspected FASD,
irrespective of IQ level.
23
Noted
The Australian Government notes the importance of schools having the capability to support
children with Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder.
The Australian Government (Department of Education) notes that the Disability Standards
for Education 2005 require schools to provide reasonable adjustments for students with
disability to enable them to participate in education on the same basis as other students.
The Australian Government’s 2020 Review of the Disability Standards for Education 2005
found a need to strengthen provider and educator capability to support students with
disability. To assist educators to better understand their responsibilities under the Disability
Standards for Education 2005, the Australian Government has developed information
products for educators (including teachers and school leaders) which illustrate good practice
approaches to support school students with disability.
Information products for students and their caregivers to support increased understanding
of their rights under the Disability Standards for Education 2005 were released in September
2022 and are available at: www.education.gov.au/disability-standards-education-2005.
These resources assist students with disability and their caregivers to work with their
educators to seek reasonable adjustments that allow them to learn and participate on the
same basis as students without disability.
Mechanisms supporting the implementation of the Disability Standards for Education 2005
in schools include the Nationally Consistent Collection of Data on School Students with
Disability - an annual collection of data about Australian school students who are receiving
adjustments due to disability - and the Schooling Resource Standard student with disability
loading.
The Nationally Consistent Collection of Data on School Students with Disability collects
information about school students with disability across Australia in a consistent, reliable
and systematic way. All schools and approved authorities for schools in Australia participate
in the Nationally Consistent Collection of Data on School Students with Disability. Under the
Nationally Consistent Collection of Data on School Students with Disability model, teachers
use their professional judgement, supported by evidence, to determine the level of
adjustment that students with disability receive over a minimum period of 10 weeks of
school education. These adjustments are based on school teams’ assessment of the
functional impact of the student’s disability on their education. Students identified in the
Nationally Consistent Collection of Data on School Students with Disability as receiving a
supplementary, substantial, or extensive level of educational adjustment attract funding
under the student with disability loading.
The model for the Nationally Consistent Collection of Data on School Students with
Disability is based on the existing obligations of all Australian schools under the Disability
Discrimination Act 1992 (DDA) and the Disability Standards for Education 2005 and draws on
the definition of disability in the DDA. The NCCD categories of disability are: physical,
24
cognitive, sensory, and social/emotional. Students with Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder may
experience varied challenges depending on their exposure and may present as having a
disability in one or more of these categories. Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder may be
diagnosed, but the Nationally Consistent Collection of Data on School Students with
Disability Guidelines also provide for school teams to ‘impute’ a disability to a student in the
absence of a medical diagnosis, supported by documented evidence that the student is
receiving adjustments based on the definition of disability in the DDA. These students would
be eligible for inclusion in the Nationally Consistent Collection of Data on School Students
with Disability and depending on the level of adjustment they receive may attract the
student with disability loading.
The Australian Government provides funding to Education Services Australia to support the
Nationally Consistent Collection of Data on School Students with Disability Portal, a free,
one-stop-shop for information and resources for teachers, school leaders and parents/carers
on the Nationally Consistent Collection of Data on School Students with Disability. Content
on the Portal is developed in consultation with State and Territory Government departments
of education and the catholic and independent sectors and is updated and added to on an
ongoing basis according to need. The Portal contains a podcast to assist teachers to
understand Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder and to provide adjustments for students to
assist their education.
As part of the 2023-24 Budget, the Australian Government announced funding for the
continuation of FASD prevention, diagnosis and support activities. This support includes
funding of $0.761 million over two years (from 2023-24) from the Australian Government
Department of Health and Aged Care to the Matilda Centre to develop, maintain and
disseminate resources targeting the primary and secondary education sector. The Australian
Government will continue to work with the Matilda Centre to explore opportunities for
targeted resources to be used in secondary schools.
Recommendation 25
The committee recommends that the Australian Government allocate funding for the
development and delivery of practical parenting programs to complement existing supports
and the FASD hotline.
Supported-In-Principle
The Australian Government recognises that caring for a child with Fetal Alcohol Spectrum
Disorder can impact greatly on families and carers.
The Australian Government (Department of Social Services) has funded family focused
alcohol and other drugs support services since 2005, initially under the National Illicit Drug
Strategy (NIDS) and then under the Family Support Program. In 2014, alcohol and other
25
drugs services were broad banded into the Children and Parenting Support sub-activity,
which is funded under the Family and Children’s Activity.
Children and Parenting Support alcohol and other drugs services provide intensive support
to vulnerable and disadvantaged families and children affected by substance misuse issues.
These services are complimentary to state and territory funded support services. The
services aim to minimise harm to children and families through individual and family
counselling, home visiting and case management, parenting education and support, and
activities to help children maintain positive routines through a focus on school attendance,
organised sport and extracurricular activities. Funding of around $4.5 million will be
provided in 2024-25 to nine organisations across Australia to deliver alcohol and other drugs
services. Children and Parenting Support funding is fully committed to 2025-26.
The Department of Social Services also funds Carer Gateway to provide supports and
services for all carers of any age who provide care to a family member or loved one,
including those with disability or a medical condition. Carer Gateway delivers evidence
based, early-intervention and preventative supports and services that are tailored to the
individual needs and circumstances of a carer.
Furthermore, the Australian Government (Department of Health and Aged Care) funds the
National Organisation for Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (NOFASD) Australia to deliver
telephone and online information and support services to individuals, families and carers
affected by Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder. Through the 2023-24 Budget, additional
funding of $1.45 million over two years (from 2023-24) is being provided to NOFASD to
continue these important services.
Recommendations 26
The committee recommends that all children and young people entering the youth justice
and child protection systems are screened for FASD.
Supported-In-Principle
The Australian Government notes that these systems and the policies in respect to people
entering these systems are the responsibility of State and Territory Governments. The
Australian Government notes that any such screening policy would be consistent with the
National Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) Strategic Action Plan 2018-2028, which
includes an objective to improve capacity for screening, diagnosis and surveillance.
The Australian Government does however provide funding to deliver Fetal Alcohol Spectrum
Disorder diagnostic services in locations across Australia, including assessments for youth
who have interacted with the youth justice system or are at risk of (further) youth justice
engagement and have possible physical, cognitive or behavioural difficulties.
26
In addition, under the Justice Policy Partnership (JPP) Strategic Framework endorsed by the
Joint Council on Closing the Gap in June 2023, the JPP will be strengthening existing and/or
new strategic cross-sector partnerships at the national and state/territory levels to consider
health and disability support/s for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander adults and young
people in places of incarceration. The JPP brings together representatives from the Coalition
of Peaks, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander experts, and Australian, state and territory
governments to take a joined-up approach to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander justice
policy.
Recommendations 27
The committee recommends that the Australian Government, in partnership with State and
Territory Governments, develop and trial protocols for screening children and young people
within child protection and youth justice systems for FASD.
Supported-In-Principle
The Australian Government notes that these systems and the policies in respect to people
that access these systems are the responsibility of State and Territory Governments. Any
such screening protocols would be consistent with the National Fetal Alcohol Spectrum
Disorder (FASD) Strategic Action Plan 2018-2028, which includes an objective to improve
capacity for screening, diagnosis and surveillance, and identifies an activity to ‘develop a
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder screening tool and response system for high-risk groups
such as youth entering correctional settings’.
Also see reference to Justice Policy Partnership work and assessment services under
Recommendation 26.
Recommendations 28
The committee recommends that the Australian Government provides further funding to
train custodial officers in FASD-specific strategies for dealing with youth with FASD or
suspected FASD in correctional facilities.
Noted
The Australian Government (Department of Health and Aged Care) funds Small and Up Pty
(PATCHES) to undertake a project to increase Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder awareness
within the justice and employment workforce. Resources developed through this project see
to:
27
• explain the characteristics of Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder and strategies to
improve the outcomes for people with Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder, their
families and the community;
• outline the assessment process for someone who is suspected of having Fetal
Alcohol Spectrum Disorder; and
• include information on linking people with Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder to
employment services.
The resources are available at https://patches.com.au/fasd.
Additional funding is also being provided by the Australian Government of approximately
$2.1 million over three years (from 2021-22) to Small and Up Pty (PATCHES) to deliver Fetal
Alcohol Spectrum Disorder diagnostic services within the youth justice system in regional
New South Wales. This project includes capacity building for the justice workforce on the
effects of prenatal alcohol exposure.
The Australian Government notes that the operation of correctional facilities is the
responsibility of State and Territory Governments.
Recommendation 29
The committee recommends that the Australian Government fund an independent study into
best-practice diversionary programs and alternative therapeutic facilities for individuals with
FASD or suspected FASD within the justice system.
Noted
The Australian Government notes that the justice system is the responsibility of State and
Territory Governments and will look for opportunities to engage on this matter with State
and Territory Governments. See reference to Justice Policy Partnership work under
Recommendation 26.
Recommendation 30
The committee recommends that more funding and support is provided by State and
Territory Child Protection authorities to carers who are caring for and supporting children
with FASD.
Noted
Funding and support for State and Territory Child Protection authorities is a matter for State
and Territory Governments.
The Australian Government more broadly provides support for carers through funding to
28
National Organisation for Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Australia to deliver telephone
and online counselling services to individuals, families and carers affected by Fetal Alcohol
Spectrum Disorder.
Recommendation 31
The committee recommends the NDIA undertake consultation and a co-design process with
First Nations organisations to improve its Remote Community Connectors Program to enable
better access to disability support services for eligible NDIS participants living in remote
Australia.
Supported
The Australian Government recognises the need to improve support for remote
communities to understand, apply for and access early interventions and disability support
services.
The National Disability Insurance Agency is partnering with Aboriginal Community
Controlled Health Organisations (ACCHOs) in several ways to improve access to culturally
safe and appropriate services and address services gaps, particularly for First Nations
participants living in remote Australia.
In April 2024, the National Disability Insurance Agency appointed a Deputy Chief Executive
Officer to lead a First Nations Group that will work on interventions to improve outcomes for
First Nations peoples with disability. This dedicated senior executive position will also bring
in a First Nations voice into the National Disability Insurance Agency’s decisions as a member
of the senior executive leadership team. This revised organisational structure will more
effectively support prioritisation, coordination of activities and work to improve outcomes
for First Nations National Disability Insurance Scheme participants and employees in remote
communities.
The National Disability Insurance Agency has established partnerships with First Nations
disability individuals and community representatives to undertake a co-design process for
the new First Nations Strategy and Implementation Plan. The National Disability Insurance
Agency has committed resourcing and funding to deliver the co-design of the First Nations
Strategy.
The National Disability Insurance Agency is strengthening its Remote Community Connector
model through current reforms with a view of a more consistent, uniform footprint.
The National Disability Insurance Agency is putting in place a range of improvements,
including increasing the coverage and capacity of the Remote Community Connectors
program to provide localised, community-based support to underserviced remote areas and
trialling alternative approaches to commissioning to improve access to services for First
Nations and remote communities. These improvements will allow stronger local
29
conversations and understanding the unique needs of each community – where the Agency
is able to tailor services to match the specific requirements and cultural sensitivities of the
community.
The National Disability Insurance Agency has committed funding of $18.1 million in the
2024-25 financial year through the Remote Community Connectors program to mostly
Aboriginal Controlled Organisations (primarily Aboriginal Medical Services and Aboriginal
Shire Councils) in remote areas to improve support to access the National Disability
Insurance Scheme.
In addition, the National Disability Insurance Agency is funding Torres and Cape Hospital and
Health Service (TCHHS) $4 million over two years to deliver an early childhood approach
across Cape York and the Torres Strait Islands.
The National Disability Insurance Agency funds the National Aboriginal Community
Controlled Health Organisation (NACCHO) $5.0 million annually to provide dedicated
support to First Nations peoples in urban and rural areas to access the National Disability
Insurance Scheme and use their plans, in the form of Aboriginal Disability Liaison Officers.
Aboriginal Disability Liaison Officers are expected to reach communities, provide insights and
other culturally relevant information in order to complement the work of and connect First
Nations peoples with Partners in the Community and National Disability Insurance Agency
state and territory Service Delivery teams.
The National Disability Insurance Agency has two trial sites for the Alternative Approaches to
Commissioning for Remote and First Nations Communities initiatives. Maningrida in the NT
was the first trial site with Katanning in WA recently announced as the second. The program
is set to provide a foundation for the future commissioning of services delivered under the
National Disability Insurance Scheme and improve access to supports for people in rural,
remote, and First Nations communities.
Recommendation 32
The committee recommends the Department of Health allocate specific funding aimed at
supporting First Nations community-led projects to prevent and manage FASD.
Supported
The Australian Government is committed to supporting First Nations community-led projects
to prevent and manage Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder.
The Australian Government (Department of Health and Aged Care) has funded the National
Awareness Campaign for Pregnancy and Breastfeeding Women, which includes a First
Nations specific campaign stream under the branding ‘Strong Born’. This stream is being led
by NACCHO and aims to use tailored community development and health promotion
30
activities to raise awareness of the impacts of alcohol use during pregnancy, while planning
a pregnancy and while breastfeeding. Through the 2023-24 Budget, the Australian
Government is providing an additional $1.4 million over two years (from 2023-24) to support
the expansion of the ‘Strong Born’ campaign, to ensure that all First Nations communities,
and the health workers that support them, have access to culturally appropriate knowledge
and skills to prevent alcohol exposed pregnancies, yarn sensitively about alcohol use in
pregnancy and identify and support children who may have FASD.
On 6 February 2023, the Prime Minister announced a $250 million landmark package for
Central Australia (the Central Australia Plan) to improve community safety, tackle
alcoholrelated harm and provide more opportunities for young people. As part of this
package, the Government committed approximately $18.4 million over four years (2022-23
to 2025-26) to the Central Australian Aboriginal Congress Aboriginal Corporation (Congress)
to expand its existing Child and Youth Assessment and Treatment Services (CYATS) program.
CYATS provides early detection and intervention for neurodevelopmental conditions, such as
FASD in six remote communities across Central Australia. Through this expansion Congress
will be able to increase the number of assessments they already provided and treatment
pathways for Aboriginal children and young people. The expansion will also further extend
the reach of services into remote communities in Central Australia, and acting as a regional
hub, increase the CYATS teams’ capacity to work with schools, other service providers and
the youth justice system.
In addition, the Australian Government has funded the MRFF’s Indigenous Health Research
Fund a total of $160 million from 2018–19 to 2028–2029. The Indigenous Health Research
Fund invests in Indigenous-led research to improve the health of First Nations people.
The Indigenous Health Research Fund’s Roadmap and Implementation Plan outline the aims
and priority areas for investment for the Indigenous Health Research Fund.
To date, the Indigenous Health Research Fund has invested $1.24 million in two grants with a
focus on research to reduce alcohol use in pregnancy.
In line with the National Agreement on Closing the Gap, the Australian Government
(Department of Health and Aged Care) works in partnership with the Aboriginal Community
Controlled Health Sector on a range of health priorities for First Nations people.
31
