Australian Government response to the
Senate Environment and Communications Committee
report:
Climate Change Amendment (Duty of Care and
Intergenerational Climate Equity) Bill 2023
DECEMBER 2024
Introduction
On 3 August 2023, the Senate referred the Climate Change Amendment (Duty of Care and
Intergenerational Climate Equity) Bill 2023 (Bill) to the Environment and Communications
Legislation Committee (Committee) for inquiry and report.
The Bill seeks to amend the Climate Change Act 2022 to require decision makers to
consider the wellbeing of current and future children when making certain decisions that are
likely to contribute to climate change, including decisions that will increase scope 1, 2 or 3
emissions.
The Department of Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water made a
submission to the inquiry and appeared before the Committee at a hearing on 22 February
2024. The Committee tabled its final report on 25 June 2024.
Response
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the bill not be passed.
Response
Agree. The Australian Government is taking strong action to cut its greenhouse gas
emissions, contribute to global emissions reductions and seize the economic benefits of a
global net zero economy—all of which is central to protecting the health and wellbeing of
Australian children. Our focus has been on driving changes across the economy to support
renewable energy and investment in a Future Made in Australia.
In the electricity sector our $20 billion Rewiring the Nation and Capacity Investment Scheme
are designed to deliver 82% renewable energy in our grids by 2030, a huge uplift from
around 30% three years ago. The $1.7 billion Energy Savings program provides real
financial support to households, businesses, and local governments to invest in renewable
energy and energy efficiency to cut their bills and emissions.
Industrial emissions are subject to our Safeguard Mechanism reforms, cutting over 200
million tonnes of emissions to 2030 and placing emissions limits on large coal and gas
facilities. The Safeguard Mechanism is now projected to deliver 500 million tonnes of onsite
emissions reductions to 2040. Our New Vehicle Efficiency Standard will give Australians
more choice to drive cleaner, cheaper to run cars. Our land and agricultural sector plan will
help reduce emissions, including through increased integrity in our carbon markets.
In the 2024-25 Budget we put in place a $22.7 billion plan for a Future Made in Australia,
which will enable us to capitalise on the job opportunities of becoming a renewable energy
superpower, leveraging our world-class skills and resources and ensuring sovereign
manufacturing in clean energy industries.
Further information on our policies can be found in our Annual Climate Change Statement
2024 and our Emissions Projections 2024, which show us able to deliver on our 2030
emissions reduction targets, with emissions projected to be 42.6% below 2005 levels by
2030 and beat the 10-year emissions budget by 152 million tonnes.
With broad support across Parliament, in 2022 the Government legislated Australia’s 2030
and 2050 targets through the Climate Change Act 2022, as well as amended 15 other Acts
to make those targets relevant to Government schemes and institutions.
The Government has continued to identify opportunities to embed Australia’s emissions
reduction targets in other legislation, including the National Reconstruction Fund Corporation
Act 2023, the Higher Education Support Act 2023, the New Vehicle Efficiency Standard Act
2024, the Net Zero Economy Authority Act 2024, the Future Made in Australia Bill 2024 and
the Future Made in Australia (Guarantee of Origin) Bill 2024.
Accordingly, Australia’s legislated emissions reduction targets are already incorporated into
four of the six acts that the Bill seeks to cover.
The approach in the Bill effectively makes administrative decision makers responsible for
considering the need to reduce emissions for current and future generations on a project by
project basis, rather than for the Commonwealth to set targets by legislation, implement
national policies to reduce emissions and decision makers to be guided by the
Commonwealth’s targets in their scheme administration. The Government agrees with the
Committee’s conclusions in the majority report that the Bill is not ‘fit for purpose’ and that it
would not ‘effectively achieve its stated aim’.
Accordingly, the Government agrees with the Committee majority view that the Climate
Change Act 2022 should not be amended as proposed by the Bill.
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that the Australian Government consider the utilisation of the
Australian Human Rights Commission’s Child Rights Impact Assessment Tool to assist in
policy development and decision making.
Response
Agreed in principle. The Australian Human Rights Commission’s Child Rights Impact
Assessment Tool (Tool) is a publicly available tool that is available for use across
government, and has been utilised by several Australian Government departments.
As part of policy development and decision making, the Australian Government considers
impacts on a range of important groups such as First Nations peoples, rural and regional
communities, and women. The Government also considers the impacts of policies on young
people, and will consider how it can make use of the Tool, including in the context of climate
change policy development.
