Australian Government response to the
Senate Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade Legislation
Committee report:
Migration Amendment (Overseas Organ Transplant
Disclosure and Other Measures) Bill 2023
DECEMBER 2024
Introduction
The Australian Government thanks the Senate Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade
Legislation Committee (the Committee) for its Inquiry into the Migration Amendment
(Overseas Organ Transplant Disclosure and Other Measures) Bill 2023 (the Bill), and thanks
those organisations and individuals who made submissions to the Inquiry and participated in
the public hearing.
This whole-of-government response to the Committee’s recommendations has been
coordinated by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, on behalf of the following
Commonwealth entities:
• Attorney-General’s Department
• Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
• Department of Health and Aged Care
• Department of Home Affairs.
The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade extends thanks to: Department of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Forestry; Australian Federal Police; Australian Health Practitioner Regulation
Agency (AHPRA); Australian Organ and Tissue Authority (OTA); Australia and New
Zealand Organ Donation Registry (ANZOD); state and territory Departments of Health; and
others for their contributions to this response.
The Bill was introduced to the Parliament by Senator Dean Smith on 22 June 2023 and seeks
to amend the Migration Act 1958 to:
• require persons entering Australia to respond to specified questions in relation
to organ transplants outside Australia
• provide for annual reporting requirements in relation to this information, and
• enable the Minister administering the Migration Act (the Minister) to refuse to
grant, or to cancel, a person’s visa if the Minister reasonably suspects the
person has been involved in conduct constituting an offence involving
trafficking in human organs.
The Explanatory Memorandum notes the Bill seeks to amend the Migration Act to include an
express reference to ‘an offence involving trafficking in human organs’ in the character test.
This would enable the Minister to refuse or cancel a person’s visa if the Minister reasonably
suspects the person has been involved in conduct constituting an offence involving trafficking
in human organs, whether or not that person has been convicted of the offence.1
Senator Smith told parliament that features of the Bill derive primarily from the inquiry and
recommendations of the Joint Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade Committee in its 2018
report titled Compassion, Not Commerce: An inquiry into Human Organ Trafficking and
Organ Transplant Tourism. 2
The Australian Government is committed to combatting modern slavery and human
trafficking in all of its forms, including organ trafficking. The Government’s responses to the
three recommendations in the Committee’s final report are set out below. Consistent with the
guidelines on Government responses, recommendations that a Bill be passed, not be passed
or amended have not been responded to. This includes Recommendation 3 of the
Committee’s report (that the Bill not be passed) and the sole recommendation in the
Coalition Senators’ Dissenting Report (which supports passage of the Bill).
1 Explanatory Memorandum, p 3.
2 Senator Dean Smith, Second Reading Speech, Senate Hansard, 22 June 2023.
1
Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 1
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government commit to delivering one or
more public awareness campaigns:
• to inform the public about the risks, dangers and consequences of illegal
overseas organ transplants; and
• aimed at increasing the number of registered organ donors in Australia.
Response:
The Australian Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) will continue to use its Smartraveller
social media and website channels to help educate Australian travellers about the risks of
illegal overseas organ transplants through the dedicated Smartraveller page ‘Organ transplant
tourism’.3 This page includes advice on the risks of receiving an illegal overseas organ
transplant. DFAT will also amplify this content through public relations activities.
The Australian Government currently delivers public awareness initiatives to increase the
number of registered organ and tissue donors in Australia. The Australian Organ and Tissue
Authority (OTA) is a Commonwealth entity established to improve access to transplants for
Australians, including by increasing organ and tissue donation. The OTA leads the national
program, in collaboration with state and territory governments, the DonateLife Network,
clinicians and the community. A key objective of the national program is to build community
awareness, education and stakeholder engagement across Australia, to promote organ and
tissue donation.
The OTA Strategy 2022–2027 sets out three key goals: build support across the community
by raising awareness, increasing family discussion and increasing registrations in Australia;
optimise opportunities by identifying donors and increasing consent, driving excellence in
donation services and increasing safe and equitable transplantation; and enhance systems by
monitoring, collecting, analysing and reporting national performance, advancing quality
safety and efficiency and sustaining specialist resources. Australia has an opt-in donation
consent system operated through the national Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR). The
register enables Australians aged 16 and over to register as an organ and tissue donor. Family
agreement is always sought when donation is possible.
The OTA, in addition to ongoing communication and engagement activities, hosts
DonateLife Week each year. This is Australia’s flagship public awareness activity to
encourage more Australians to register as an organ and tissue donor and have the
conversation with their family. Activities to support DonateLife Week are held in June, July
and August each year and include a digital campaign, media, events and community
engagement with a call to action to register and talk to family.
The Australian Government and all state and territory governments have recently endorsed
the National Strategy for Organ Donation, Retrieval and Transplantation (the Strategy).
Additional activities aimed at increasing donors registered on the AODR or public awareness
activities will be considered by the Australian Government and all state and territory
governments as part of Strategy implementation planning.
3 www.smartraveller.gov.au/before-you-go/health/organ-transplant-tourism
2
Recommendation 2
The Committee recommends that the Australian Government redoubles its efforts to
implement the recommendations agreed to in its 2021 response to the Joint Standing
Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade’s report Compassion, Not Commerce:
An inquiry into Human Organ Trafficking and Organ Transplant Tourism.
Response:
The Australian Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
The Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade’s report Compassion,
Not Commerce: An inquiry into Human Organ Trafficking and Organ Transplant Tourism
(Compassion, Not Commerce) contained 12 recommendations. Of these, the
Australian Government accepted (in principle or in part) six of the recommendations
(Recommendations 2, 3, 7, 8, 9 and 11) and noted the other six recommendations.
Annex A details how the Australian Government has implemented the recommendations
accepted (in principle or in part) in response to Compassion, Not Commerce.
Annex A also provides an erratum, which clarifies the Government’s 2021 response to
Recommendation 12 of Compassion, Not Commerce.
3
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that the Bill not be passed.
Response:
The guidelines on Government responses provide that the Government is not required to
respond to recommendations in a Parliamentary Committee report that a Bill not be passed.
Accordingly, the Australian Government has not responded to Recommendation 3.
4
ANNEX A
Parliamentary Inquiry Recommendation Implementation
Status Update - September 2024
Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade – Compassion, Not
Commerce: An Inquiry into Human Organ Trafficking and Organ Transplant Tourism
(Compassion, Not Commerce)
Recommendation 2 - Compassion, Not Commerce
Given the contention and ongoing debate around transplant practices in China, the
Sub-Committee recommends that the Australian Government:
• monitor the transplantation practices of other countries with regard to
consistency with human rights obligations, including with regard to the use of
the organs of executed prisoners;
• seek the resumption of human rights dialogues with China;
• continue to express concern to China regarding allegations of organ trafficking
in that country; and
• offer to assist with the further progression of ethical reforms to the Chinese
organ matching and transplantation system.
Response (December 2021)
The Australian Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
The Foreign Policy White Paper confirms Australia’s commitment to advancing human rights
globally. All people have the right to fundamental freedoms and to live their lives with
dignity. Australia’s diplomatic network will continue to monitor local human rights situations
around the world and provide appropriate reporting.
The Australian Government notes that while the last Australia-China Human Rights Dialogue
took place in 2014, the Government continues to raise human rights concerns with China
both bilaterally and in relevant international forums. While the Australian Government is
open to resuming the bilateral human rights dialogue at an appropriate time and level, the
Government considers the fact of raising and discussing these vital issues is more important
than the modality in which they are raised.
The Government has expressed concern to China regarding allegations of organ trafficking
on a number of occasions. The Australian Government will continue to examine closely
allegations of organ trafficking in China and, as appropriate, raise the issue with the Chinese
Government.
China consistently rejects reports of forced organ harvesting. Chinese officials acknowledge
that organs have previously been harvested from executed prisoners, but tell us that there is
now growing regulation of China’s organ transplant system, including requirements that all
organ donation must be voluntary. There may be opportunities for Australia to share our own
organ matching and transplantation experience and practice.
1
Implementation Status (September 2024)
Implementation of the Australian Government’s 2021 response is ongoing.
The Australian Government is committed to upholding human rights globally. Our
diplomatic network monitors local human rights situations around the world and provides
reporting to inform government policy making and response. Sources of information include
independent reports of UN Special Procedure Mandate Holders and the Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR).
The Australian Government continues to follow developments in transplantation practices of
other countries and review available evidence as new reports are published. The Government
is aware of statements by UN experts, human rights organisations, and government
representatives alleging ‘organ harvesting’ that targets minorities in detention in China,
including Falun Gong practitioners, Uyghurs, Tibetans, Muslims and Christians.
Officials from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade have raised concerns about
reports of organ harvesting directly with China. The Australian Government also consistently
raises our human rights concerns more broadly, directly with China and in multilateral
forums. Most recently, the Prime Minister raised human rights with Chinese Premier Li
during his visit to Australia in June 2024. On 23 January 2024, the Government used China’s
Universal Periodic Review (UPR) in the Human Rights Council to make specific
recommendations to China to improve its domestic human rights situation, including with
regard to Hong Kong, Xinjiang and Tibet. On 4 July 2024, in a statement at the adoption for
China’s UPR report, the Government expressed its disappointment that China did not accept
any of the recommendations that Australia had made.
The Australia-China human rights dialogue was last held in 2014 and a future dialogue is not
scheduled. The dialogue was suspended in 2014 based on considerations at the time with
regard to the level of representation from China and the relative effectiveness of the forum.
The Australian Government considers consistently raising and discussing these vital issues is
more important than the modality in which they are raised. The Government will continue to
raise human rights concerns at every appropriate opportunity, directly with China, including
at the highest levels, and in multilateral forums including the United Nations General
Assembly and the Human Rights Council.
As the United Nations directing and coordinating authority for health, the World Health
Organization (WHO) supports international collaboration to strengthen global health systems,
promote health and manage health threats and emergencies. Australia engages with the
WHO’s normative and technical functions, including the development of global health policy
guidelines and standards, through our participation in the WHO’s decision-making body, the
World Health Assembly, which is comprised of 194 WHO Member States.
In 2024, the 77th World Health Assembly adopted resolution WHA77.4: Increasing
availability, ethical access and oversight of transplantation of human cells, tissues and organs
by consensus (i.e. with the backing of the international community). The resolution urges
WHO Member States to take measures to prevent and combat human trafficking for the
purpose of organ removal and trafficking in human organs, and to protect victims and
survivors, including by strengthening legislative frameworks and reporting to law
enforcement agencies. The resolution calls on the WHO Director-General to strengthen
cooperation with United Nations agencies, and other relevant stakeholders, to improve
country, regional and global capacity to respond to identified cases of human trafficking for
the purpose of organ removal and of trafficking in human organs. WHO will report on the
implementation of WHA77.4 in 2026.
2
Recommendation 3 - Compassion, Not Commerce
The Sub-Committee recommends that the Australian Government meets international best
practice standards by establishing a comprehensive organ donation data collection repository,
based possibly on the ANZDATA model, but comprising a single point of access to data
regarding all organ transplantations in Australia, including outcomes of treatment, deaths,
travel overseas for treatment, cross referencing against waiting lists and other relevant
information.
Response (December 2021)
The Australian Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
Enhancements to organ donation and transplantation data collection have been considered as
part of the review of the Australian organ donation, retrieval and transplantation system.
On 13 April 2018, the Council of Australian Governments (COAG) Health Council agreed
that it would undertake a review of the organ donation, retrieval and transplantation system
led by the Commonwealth in collaboration with states and territories. The review report was
presented to the COAG Health Council to seek agreement to publicly release the report, and
it was published in February 2020. It includes the development of a long-term strategy for
organ retrieval and transplantation.
The Department of Health is working with all states and territories and the Australian Organ
and Tissue Donation and Transplantation Authority (Organ and Tissue Authority) to consider
the review report, including recommendations that relate to changes to existing registries of
organ transplantation outcomes. The long-term strategy is now being developed.
The Australian Government currently contributes funding through the Organ and Tissue
Authority to maintain national organ specific outcome registries for:
• kidney – Australian and New Zealand Dialysis and Transplant Registry
(ANZDATA)
• heart and lung – Australia and New Zealand Cardiothoracic Organ Transplant
Register
• liver – Australia and New Zealand Liver Transplant Register
• pancreas – Australia and New Zealand Islets and Pancreas Transplant Register.
The ANZDATA also collects and reports data on the incidence, prevalence and outcome of
dialysis treatment and kidney transplantation for patients with end-stage kidney disease in
Australia and New Zealand.
Implementation Status (September 2024)
Implementation of the Australian Government’s 2021 response is in progress.
The Australian Government invests in continued improvements to organ donation and
transplantation data collection in Australia.
The Australian Government contributes funding through the Organ and Tissue Authority
(OTA) to maintain clinical quality registries for national donation and transplantation
activities and outcomes. The OTA delivers the OrganMatch system in partnership with the
Australian Red Cross LifeBlood. OrganMatch is a centralised donation, laboratory and
transplant system that facilitates patient waitlisting, recipient matching and offer
management, enabling a national capture of key transplant metrics for all waitlisted and
3
transplant patients in Australia and New Zealand. Patient outcomes are captured in the
individual registries below.
Clinical quality registries exist for:
• deceased kidney donation – Australian and New Zealand Dialysis and
Transplant Registry (ANZDATA)
• living kidney donation - Australia and New Zealand Living Kidney Donation
Registry (ANZLKD)
• heart – Australia and New Zealand Heart Transplant Register (ANZHRT)
• lung – Australia and New Zealand Lung Transplant Register (ANZLUNG)
• liver – Australia and New Zealand Liver Transplant Register
• pancreas – Australia and New Zealand Islets and Pancreas Transplant Register,
and
• organ, eye and tissue donation - Australian and New Zealand Organ Donation
Registry (ANZOD).
National Strategy for Organ Donation, Retrieval and Transplantation (Strategy)
On 13 April 2018, the COAG Health Council agreed that it would undertake a review of the
organ donation, retrieval and transplantation system (Organ Review) led by the
Commonwealth in collaboration with states and territories.
Recommendations from the Organ Review were reviewed by all governments to inform
content for the development of the draft Strategy. Development of the Strategy commenced
in 2019 and was delayed due to COVID-19 impacts. In April 2022, all Health Ministers’
agreed to the draft Strategy, with public consultation undertaken between May and November
2022. The Australian Government and all state and territory governments have recently
endorsed the Strategy. Further consultation with the sector will occur as planning for Organ
Strategy implementation activities are developed.
The Australian Government has committed ongoing funding to allow continued
improvements and efficiencies to be made to OrganMatch, with the aim to create efficiencies
and improve patient outcomes. The Strategy aims to continue to support the use of
OrganMatch to drive optimal clinical best practice, ensuring Australia has a system with the
capability to work with future capacity requirements and technological advancements.
4
Recommendation 7 - Compassion, Not Commerce
The Sub-Committee recommends that the Australian Government amend the
Criminal Code Act 1995 and any other relevant legislation insofar as offences relating to
organ trafficking:
• include trafficking in human organs, including the solicitation of a commercial
organ transplant
• apply to any Australian citizen, resident or body corporate
• apply regardless of whether the proscribed conduct occurred either within or
outside of the territory of Australia; apply regardless of the nationality or
residence of the victim, and
• apply regardless of the existence, or lack thereof, of equivalent laws in the
jurisdiction in which the offending conduct occurred.
Response (December 2021)
The Australian Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
The Australian Government is committed to combating all forms of human trafficking and
slavery, including organ trafficking. Australia has a comprehensive legal framework in place
to prevent and respond to organ trafficking. Organ trafficking has been criminalised in the
Criminal Code Act 1995 since 2005. In 2013, the Government strengthened its response by
introducing four standalone organ trafficking offences in the Criminal Code:
• Section 271.7B: Offence of organ trafficking – entry into and exit from
Australia
• Section 271.7C: Organ trafficking – aggravated offence
• Section 271.7D: Offence of domestic organ trafficking, and
• Section 271.7E: Domestic organ trafficking – aggravated offence.
These offences comprehensively criminalise trafficking in persons for the purpose of organ
removal, including organising or facilitating the entry into, exit from, or transportation
within, Australia. Organ transplant tourism will be captured by these offences where a person
organised or facilitated the transport, or proposed transport, of the donor to, from or within
Australia.
These offences have extended geographical jurisdiction and apply to conduct that occurs
wholly or partly in Australia or has a result in Australia, as well as applying to conduct
occurring wholly overseas by Australian citizens.
The Australian Government will explore potential legislative options to strengthen the
Criminal Code offences to address this crime to capture conduct by Australians overseas that
does not involve the trafficking of a person into or from Australia for the purpose of organ
removal – for example, a situation where an Australian citizen trafficked a person within a
foreign country for the purpose of organ removal.
Within Australia, all states and territories have legislated against the sale of organs,
regardless of consent. The Australian Government will explore potential legislative options to
strengthen the Criminal Code offences to capture the wilful exploitation of individuals for the
purposes of organ transplantation by an Australian citizen, resident or body corporate outside
of Australia.
5
Implementation Status (September 2024)
Implementation of the Australian Government’s 2021 response is in progress.
The Attorney-General’s Department completed a targeted review of Australia’s modern
slavery offences in Divisions 270 and 271 of the Criminal Code (Cth) in 2023 in
collaboration with the Australian Federal Police and the Commonwealth Director of Public
Prosecutions. This was an initiative of the National Action Plan to Combat Modern Slavery
2020-25.
The targeted review included consideration of Australia’s offences for trafficking in persons
for the purpose of organ removal in Division 271, including their alignment with international
good-practice, consistent with the terms of reference for the targeted review. In line with the
terms of reference, the targeted review also considered and had regard to reports from
parliamentary inquiries, including Compassion Not Commerce. The targeted review was
informed by public consultations and the findings report was published in August 2023.4
The Australian Government has considered the findings report and agreed to develop
potential legislative reforms to address the findings of the targeted review.
Addressing key findings may require extending the jurisdiction of Australia’s trafficking in
persons offences (including for the purpose of organ removal) to capture overseas conduct by
Australian citizens, residents and bodies corporate, without the need for the trafficked victim
or survivor to have crossed an Australian border.
4 www.consultations.ag.gov.au/crime/modern-slavery-offences/
6
Recommendation 8 - Compassion, Not Commerce
The Sub-Committee recommends that the Australian Government establishes a multi-lingual
public health education program that:
• addresses the legal, ethical and medical risks associated with participation in
organ transplant tourism
• includes a stream for educating frontline staff such as medical professionals
about how to best identify possible cases of organ harvesting and support both
vulnerable victims and desperate patients, based possibly on the Anti-Slavery
Australia e-learning model
• is multi-lingual, and
• is designed in particular to educate Australians who were born in, or have
family associations in, countries where human organ trafficking is known or
suspected to occur.
Response (December 2021)
The Australian Government accepts this recommendation in principle.
The Australian Government already provides information to medical professionals on organ
trafficking through a fact sheet available on the Department of Home Affairs website.5
Information for the general public on the risks of medical tourism is available on the
Department of Health website6 and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade’s
Smartraveller website.7
The Australian Government’s national reform program to increase organ donation rates
includes coordinated community education and awareness activities to increase knowledge
about organ donation and transplantation. Multilingual resources are available at
donatelife.gov.au in more than 20 languages.
Implementation Status (September 2024)
Implementation of the Australian Government’s 2021 response is in progress.
The Australian Government continues to provide information to medical professionals on
organ trafficking through a fact sheet available on the Department of Home Affairs website.
Information for the general public on the risks of medical tourism continues to be available
on the Department of Health website and the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade’s
Smartraveller website, including the dedicated webpage on organ transplant tourism.8
The OTA’s national program for increasing organ and tissue donation includes the OTA’s
Partnership program and DonateLife Community Awareness Grants (CAGs). These
initiatives support a range of activities to raise awareness and engage the community on the
importance of organ and tissue donation, encouraging all Australians to talk to their family
about donation and to register on the Australian Organ Donor Register.
The 2024 CAGs aim to extend the reach of existing community awareness and education
activities regarding donation and transplantation by reaching and engaging Australians from
Culturally and Linguistically Diverse (CALD) backgrounds.
The OTA has also developed multilingual educational and awareness materials.
5 www.homeaffairs.gov.au/criminal-justice/files/organ-trafficking-fact-sheet.pdf
6 www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/health-pubhlth-strateg-quaranti-index.htm
7 www.smartraveller.gov.au/before-you-go/health/medical-tourism
8 www.smartraveller.gov.au/before-you-go/health/organ-transplant-tourism
7
Recommendation 9 - Compassion, Not Commerce
The Sub-Committee recommends that the Australian Government includes information on
trafficking in human organs and transplant tourism on relevant government websites,
including on the SmartTraveller.gov.au website, on country-specific pages of countries where
human organ trafficking is known or suspected to occur.
Response (December 2021)
The Australian Government accepts this recommendation in part.
The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade will publish information about organ
trafficking and organ transplant tourism, and the risks associated with both, under the health
section in the ‘before you go’ advice on the Smartraveller website.9
As trafficking in human organs and transplant tourism is a complex, evolving problem
encompassing many countries, and due to the limitations of specific data, the Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade considers that a central point of reference on the Smartraveller
website10 is most suitable at this time. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade will
keep country-specific pages under review in consultation with relevant Australian embassies
and high commission.
Implementation Status (September 2024)
The Australian Government’s 2021 response has been implemented.
The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade published a dedicated Smartraveller page on
organ transplant tourism on 27 February 2024.11 The content addresses the legal and ethical
issues of receiving an organ transplant overseas, including the potential risk of unknowingly
participating in organ trafficking.
During the 2024-25 financial year, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade will use its
Smartraveller social media channels to amplify the website content to a broader audience.
9 www.smartraveller.gov.au/before-you-go/health
10 www.smartraveller.gov.au
11 www.smartraveller.gov.au/before-you-go/health/organ-transplant-tourism
8
Recommendation 11 - Compassion, Not Commerce
The Sub-Committee recommends that the Australian Government seeks to improve organ
donation rates through a number of approaches including:
• consultation with the relevant agencies, continue the promotion of organ
donation including education and awareness campaigns;
• ongoing funding of the Supporting Leave for Living Organ Donors program
and the Australian Paired Kidney Exchange Program (AKX); and
• further investigation of other countries donation programs, including Opt-Out
organ donation programs to determine whether such a program could be
appropriate for the Australian health system.
Response (December 2021)
The Australian Government accepts this recommendation in part.
The Australian Government accepts the need for ongoing promotion of organ donation, and
the continued funding of the Supporting Living Organ Donors Program and the Australian
and New Zealand Paired Kidney Exchange Program (ANZKX).
The Australian Government notes the recommendation that there be further investigation into
other international donation programs, including consent models.
Promotion of organ donation
The Australian Government remains committed to further increasing organ donation rates to
increase the number of Australians receiving a transplant. Since the implementation of the
Australian Government’s national reform agenda on organ and tissue donation for
transplantation in 2009, deceased organ donation has more than doubled.
The Organ and Tissue Authority was established in 2009 by the Australian Government to
lead the national program in collaboration with states and territories. A key part of the
program is increasing education and awareness.
As outlined in response to Recommendation 3, work is currently underway on the
development of a new long-term strategy for organ retrieval and transplantation which will
build on the Government’s national reform program on organ and tissue donation for
transplantation.
Supporting Living Organ Donors and Australian and New Zealand Paired Kidney Exchange
programs
The Australian Government is also committed to improving the lives of more Australians
through living organ donation.
The Supporting Living Organ Donors Program is an important part of the Australian
Government’s commitment to increasing organ donation rates, ensuring that cost is no barrier
for living organ donors in Australia. The program allows donors to claim reimbursement for
some out-of-pocket expenses incurred as a result of their organ donation.
In 2018-19, 109 patients accessed support through the program, with total expenditure of
around $428,000.
9
The Program provides:
• financial contribution to employers to either replenish an employee's leave or
contribute towards reimbursing an employer who has made a payment to their
employee in place of income lost due to organ donation; and/or
• funding of up to $1,000 directly to the donor to meet some of the out-of-pocket
expenses incurred as a result of the donation.
The Australian Government is also committed to supporting patients through funding
provided to the Organ and Tissue Authority to coordinate the ANZKX Program.
The ANZKX Program matches incompatible kidney donor/recipient pairs with other
incompatible pairs enrolled in the program across Australia and New Zealand. The ANZKX
Program finds matches for people:
• who are eligible for a kidney transplant;
• who have a living donor who is willing to donate; and
• whose living donor is unable to donate because their blood or tissue type is not
compatible.
Investigation of other countries’ organ donation programs
The Australian Government draws on findings from international programs to inform organ
donation and transplantation policy in Australia.
The international experience was taken into account in the decision by all Australian
governments in 2009 to maintain Australia’s informed consent or ‘opt-in’ model. This gives
individuals the option to record their intent or legal consent to donate their organs and/or
tissues on the Australian Organ Donor Register.
The current Australian position of ‘opt-in’ has been informed by research, evidence and
discussions with state and territory governments, which have responsibility for the legislative
framework for organ and tissue donation for transplantation under their respective human
tissue legislation.
Experience in other countries shows that systems which compel organ donation, such as ‘opt
out’ models, are not necessarily the reason for increased donation rates. Research shows that
better long-term results are achieved through systemic approaches that educate and involve
hospitals, clinicians, donor families and the general public.
This approach has been implemented in Australia through the work of the Organ and Tissue
Authority and its national DonateLife Network. The nationally coordinated program is
focused on a best practice clinical system in hospitals, combined with community awareness
and engagement. Its success is demonstrated by the trend of growth in organ donation over
the past decade. Since the national program started in 2009, the number of deceased organ
donors more than doubled (554 donors in 2018), resulting in 11,000 Australians receiving a
lifesaving transplant.
The Australian Government continues to monitor international outcomes.
10
Implementation Status (September 2024)
Implementation of the Australian Government’s 2021 response is in progress.
Supporting Living Organ Donors (SLOD) Program
The Department of Health continues to administer and fund the SLOD Program, which aims
to remove cost as a barrier for living organ donation.
The SLOD Program provides reimbursement of leave and out-of-pocket expenses associated
with donor testing, surgery, and recovery. It seeks to minimise the evidence requirements and
administrative burden placed on donors applying for the SLOD Program whilst ensuring the
financial reimbursements are not an incentive to donate.
Promotion and optimisation of the SLOD Program will be explored as part of the
implementation of the National Strategy for Organ Donation, Retrieval and Transplantation
(the Strategy).
Over 2023-24, the SLOD Program supported 93 donors and reimbursed a total $464,667.07
for leave and out-of-pocket expenses.
Organ and Tissue Authority Strategy 2022-27 (OTA Strategy)
The OTA Strategy 2022-27 aims to return donation and transplantation activity to
pre-pandemic levels and to drive further improvements through:
• building support across the community - raising awareness, increasing family
discussion, increasing registrations
• optimising opportunities in the clinical sector - identifying donors and
increasing consent, driving excellence in donation services, increasing safe and
equitable transplantation, and
• enhancing systems to enable quality outcomes - monitoring, collecting
analysing and reporting national performance, advancing quality safety and
efficiency, and sustaining specialist resources.
In 2023, around 7.5 million people were registered on the Australian Organ Donor Register
(AODR). This is 36% of the eligible Australian population.
The OTA has set a national target of increasing registration to 50 percent of those aged 16
years and over by 2027. To achieve this, the OTA is exploring options with all governments
for large scale registration initiatives to significantly increase the number of people on the
Australian Organ Donor Register (AODR). This includes a focus on community awareness
campaigns.
Implementation of the OTA Strategy will support nationally consistent best practices across
the end-to-end system, including retrieval and transplantation.
The OTA Strategy 2022-27 includes the development of a living kidney national strategy
which will include the Australian and New Zealand Paired Kidney Exchange program and
the SLOD Program, to increase living donation in Australia.
The OTA has a well-developed network of international colleagues and regularly engages on
best practice, emerging technologies and consent systems. All countries agree there needs to
be multiple areas of focus to increase donation. The consent system is just one area. The
United Kingdom (UK) is the most recent country to change to a deemed consent opt-out
system. The evidence is not clear at this point whether this change will see a sustained
increase in the number of organ donors in the UK.
11
Erratum - Compassion, Not Commerce – Recommendation 12
The following erratum to the Australian Government’s 2021 response to Recommendation 12
of Compassion, Not Commerce is noted.
The Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Forestry advises that the Biosecurity Act 2015
is not an appropriate mechanism to include when implementing Recommendation 12.
The objectives of the Biosecurity Act are to manage the risk of pests and diseases entering
Australian territory and causing harm to animal, plant and human health, the environment and
the economy. For the purposes of the Biosecurity Act, ethical considerations around the
sourcing of goods are only relevant to the extent that those considerations inform an
assessment of the biosecurity risk associated with those goods. As such the Biosecurity Act is
not the appropriate legislative instrument to give effect to Recommendation 12.
12
