Monday, 25 November 2024 SENATE 15
1.9 One Nation agrees with this concern. The bill misconstrues human rights as relative, indeed as subordinate to the need of
government to suppress opinions they don't like.
That's what you tried to do.
1.10 The Human Rights Law Centre recommended Clause 11(e) should be amended to reflect a broader commitment to human
rights in the bill's objectives. It also recommended the Australian Human Rights Commission should be consulted on the
development of codes.
'Consultation'—that'd be nice.
1.11 Several submissions related to the specific areas of misinformation. The Australian Medical Professional Society
submitted:
By centralising control over what constitutes medical 'truth' in the hands of government regulators, we risk creating an even
more Orwellian twist in a system that is already subject to manipulation by powerful interests, to further suppress inconvenient
facts and legitimate debate. This would be disastrous not only for free speech and democracy, but for public health as well.
People's lives depend on this. And you wanted to stop it.
1.12 The report failed to address a critical failing in the debate around COVID. Namely that information presented as medical
truth at the time has been proven to be wrong—
not only wrong but completely contradicting the truth—
and information banned as misinformation has now been proven to be true.
Repeatedly, repeatedly and repeatedly.
1.13 On the issue of COVID messaging, One Nation has maintained a contrary position to the Government of the day since
2020. This followed expert testimony from multiple specialists, research doctors and whistle blowers which contradicted the
official narrative.
1.14 The implication is simple—what is misinformation one day is truth the next. This is the danger in the Government deciding
what is and is not misinformation. The bias will always be in favour of the government's 'truth'.
I asked every witness a fundamental question on the last day of the hearing: who is the arbiter of truth? No-one
could say who is specified as the arbiter of truth in the bill. They all said that it would default to ACMA. Other
provisions in my additional comments included: religious freedom, inauthentic behaviour and media literacy. But
the fundamental thing is this was an attempt by the Labor Party to build on the Liberal Party's previous attempts at
censorship by corralling misinformation under their definition, and then driving the social media organisations, the
big tech companies, to ram it down people's throats. That was what you were doing. I'm pleased to see that the
people of Australia have put the brake on you. Now I appeal to the people of Australia to keep a foot on their throat
because we must stop the banning of under-16-year-old people from social media.
The ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT (Senator O'Sullivan): Senator McKenzie, you have 10 seconds.
Senator McKENZIE (Victoria—Leader of the Nationals in the Senate) (11:34): Ten seconds! How
embarrassing it is for the Labor government to have to withdraw the misinformation and disinformation bill on the
first day of the last sitting week. You've silenced the Senate this week, and you're trying to silence Australians.
The ACTING DEPUTY PRESIDENT: Thank you, Senator McKenzie. Unfortunately, the time has expired
for this debate. The question is that the motion moved by Senator Grogan be agreed to.
Question agreed to.
BILLS
Cyber Security Bill 2024
Intelligence Services and Other Legislation Amendment (Cyber Security) Bill 2024
Security of Critical Infrastructure and Other Legislation Amendment (Enhanced Response and
Prevention) Bill 2024
First Reading
Bills received from the House of Representatives.
Senator AYRES (New South Wales—Assistant Minister for Trade and Assistant Minister for a Future Made in
Australia) (11:35): I move:
That these bills may proceed without formalities, may be taken together and be now read a first time.
Question agreed to.
Bills read a first time.
CHAMBER
16 SENATE Monday, 25 November 2024
Second Reading
Senator AYRES (New South Wales—Assistant Minister for Trade and Assistant Minister for a Future Made in
Australia) (11:36): I table revised explanatory memoranda relating to the bills, and I move:
That these bills be now read a second time.
I seek leave to have the second reading speeches incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The speeches read as follows—
CYBER SECURITY BILL 2024
This Bill, alongside the Intelligence Services and Other Legislation Amendment (Cyber Security) Bill (ISA Bill) and the
Security of Critical Infrastructure and Other Legislation Amendment (Enhanced Response and Prevention) Bill (ERP Bill), form
the Cyber Security Legislative Reforms Package that will collectively strengthen our national cyber defences and build cyber
resilience across the Australian economy.
This suite of legislative reforms will implement seven initiatives under the 2023-2030 Australian Cyber Security Strategy, a
significant step in achieving the Australian Government's vision of becoming a world leader in cyber security by 2030.
To achieve this goal, we must understand that cyber security is everyone's responsibility.
Our connections online form a significant part of the lives of most Australians—they enhance the way we live, work and
play, and as we continue to invest in transformative digital technologies, this will only expand. At the same time, we need to be
clear about how we're protecting Australian individuals and businesses. In order to enhance our collective cyber resilience, we
need a clear legislative framework that addresses whole-of-economy cyber security issues, and positions us to respond to new
and emerging cyber threats.
We need to ensure individuals can trust the products they use every day; we need to enhance our understanding of the threat
of ransomware and cyber extortion so we can break the ransomware business model; we need to enhance protections for
individuals experiencing a cyber incident to encourage their engagement with government; and we need to learn the lessons
from cyber security incidents that have had a significant, detrimental impact on millions of Australians so that we can be better
prepared going forward.
The Cyber Security Bill provides this framework, bringing together measures to achieve the Australian Government's vision
under one holistic piece of legislation.
The Bill contains four measures:
• The first measure under the Bill will ensure Australians can trust their digital products by enabling the Government to
establish mandatory security standards for smart devices. This measure will not only bring us into line with
international best practice, but will provide Australians with peace of mind, that the smart devices we have come to
rely on also meet our expectations around security.
• The second measure helps to build our understanding of the ransomware threat that continues to cause large-scale harm
to the Australian economy and national security. Mandatory reporting of ransomware payments will crystalise the
picture of how many businesses in Australia are being extorted into making ransomware payments. With these timely
and comprehensive insights the Government will be better able to develop the resources, tools and support that are
most useful to industry, and help break the ransomware business model.
• The third measure seeks to support and assure Australian organisations as they respond to a cyber security incident.
This measure affirms the role of the National Cyber Security Coordinator to coordinate whole-of-government incident
response efforts, and seeks to increase trust and engagement between business and Government during a cyber incident
by limiting the circumstances under which the Coordinator can use and share information that has been voluntarily
provided by an affected entity. This measure complements the limited use measure put in place for the Australian
Signals Directorate through the Intelligence Services and Other Legislation Amendment (Cyber Security) Bill. With
these measures, businesses will have greater comfort to report cyber incidents and gain the assistance they need to
respond to, and recover from, cyber incidents.
• The fourth measure in the Cyber Security Bill establishes the Cyber Incident Review Board as an independent, advisory
body to conduct no-fault, post-incident reviews of significant cyber security incidents in Australia. Reflecting the
success of the United States' Cyber Safety Review Board, this new Board will review the circumstances that led to a
significant cyber security incident, form findings and provide recommendations for both government and industry to
enhance collective cyber resilience.
These four measures form the Cyber Security Bill. Together with the other Bills in this Package, this Bill will equip both
Government and industry with the awareness and resilience to better protect Australians from cyber security threats, providing
a cohesive legislative toolbox for Australia to move forward with clarity and confidence in the face of an ever-changing cyber
security landscape.
On 9 October, the Government referred the package to the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security. The
Committee has now handed down its report and recommended that, subject to implementation of the recommendations in its
CHAMBER
Monday, 25 November 2024 SENATE 17
report, the Package be passed by the Parliament. The Government agrees or agrees in principle to all thirteen recommendations
in the Committee's report.
The Government agrees to recommendations two and three, and will ensure reporting is user friendly, leveraging the existing
single reporting portal. The Government will take an education-first approach, informing impacted entities of their new
obligations through communications campaigns.
The Government agrees in principle to recommendation four. The Government agrees that ransomware payment reporting
obligations will only apply to the extent that the ransomware incident relates to the reporting business entity's operations in
Australia. The Cyber Security Bill as drafted gives this effect and this will be clarified in guidance.
The Government agrees to recommendation five and has revised the Explanatory Memorandum. The Explanatory
Memorandum as tabled in the Senate gives effect to this intention that Standing Members of the Board will not need to be
members of the Australian Public Service. In line with the Committee's report, composition of standing members will be
considered further through industry consultation on the rules.
The Government agrees in principle with recommendation six, that the Minister for Cyber Security should consult with the
Board before approving the Terms of Reference for each review. Consultation with the Board is built into the legislative
framework and the Terms of Reference will be developed by the Board itself, prior to seeking approval from the Minister for
Cyber Security.
The Government agrees with recommendation seven of the Committee's report, and has made amendments to the Cyber
Security Bill in the House of Representatives to address this recommendation. The Cyber Security Bill, as introduced in the
Senate, clarifies that information obtained by the National Cyber Security Coordinator in relation to a cyber security incident,
or acquired by a Commonwealth body or State body from a ransomware payment report, is not admissible against the impacted
entity in certain criminal or civil proceedings.
Concomitantly, these amendments ensure that information obtained by the Cyber Incident Review Board in the performance
of its functions is not admissible in evidence against the entity in certain criminal and civil proceedings. The ISA Bill has also
been amended in the House of Representatives to address recommendation seven to further clarify the application of the
admissibility protections conferred by the limited use obligation.
Protections afforded to individuals and information under limited use have been further clarified in the Bills, explanatory
memorandum and industry guidance, to address recommendation seven.
These actions ensure Government and industry can work together to communicate with clarity and confidence, making our
responses more efficient and based on real-time insights. Cooperation on a national scale is one of Australia's greatest advantages
against malicious cyber activity.
The Government agrees in principle to recommendation eight. The Government agrees any other right, privilege or immunity
that a ransomware payment reporting entity has in respect to any proceedings, including legal professional privilege, will not
be impacted. The Cyber Security Bill, as introduced in both chambers, provides this legal effect and the Department will ensure
that this is clear to entities affected by the regime.
The Government agrees to recommendation nine, and the Department of Home Affairs will publish additional guidance on
the intended interpretation and application of key definitions introduced in the Security of Critical Infrastructure Act 2018
(SOCI Act). This will be part of the comprehensive guidance being developed on the amendments being made under the ERP
Bill to assist regulated entities in understanding their obligations. Consistent with previous reforms to the SOCI Act, the
Department will continue to take an education-first approach to compliance, reserving compliance and enforcement action to a
last resort.
The Government agrees with recommendation ten of the Committee's report, and has amended the Cyber Security Bill in the
House of Representatives. The Cyber Security Bill, as introduced in the Senate, introduces a provision that the Committee may
review the operation, effectiveness and implications of the Cyber Security Act as soon as practicable after 1 December 2027.
The Government agrees to recommendation eleven. The Minister for Home Affairs will initiate an independent review under
section 60A of the SOCI Act by no later than 1 November 2025.
The Government agrees with recommendation twelve, and has amended the ERP Bill in the House of Representatives to
amend section 60B of the SOCI Act to extend the Committee's ability to initiate a review into the operation, effectiveness and
implications of the SOCI Act from 3 years to 5 years from Royal Assent of the Security Legislation Amendment (Critical
Infrastructure) Act 2021 (SLACI Act). The Government acknowledges the importance of conducting a holistic review of the
SOCI Act, after the amendments being made by the ERP Bill are implemented. Together, the approach to recommendations
eleven and twelve will ensure an independent review can fully assess the operation of the SOCI Act in time to inform the
Committee's next review.
The Government agrees with recommendation thirteen, and has amended the ERP Bill in the House of Representatives to
repeal section 60AAA of the SOCI Act, removing the now redundant six-monthly reporting to the Committee relating to
consultation undertaken by the Department on the amendments made by the Security Legislation Amendment (Critical
Infrastructure Protection) Act 2022 and the SLACI Act. I thank the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Intelligence and Security
(Committee) for its work on this Bill through its inquiry and recommendations.
I extend my thanks to staff at the Department of Home Affairs for their incredibly hard work developing this Bill. I commend
this Bill to the chamber.
CHAMBER
