 
  

                                                          

               Australian Government response to the                   
                   Senate                    
                   Economics          Legislation Committee                     r         eport:   

                
              Treasury Laws Amendment (Consumer Data Right) Bill 2022 [Provisions]     

             


            December          2024   


      Introduction     
  The Australian Government thanks the Senate Economic Legislation Committee for its consideration of the Treasury Laws Amendment (Consumer Data Right) Bill 2022.   
  On 9 August 2024, the Government announced it will reset the Consumer Data Right (CDR) to deliver better consumer outcomes.         
  The Government provides the following response to the Committee’s recommendations.                


    Response to the recommendations                             


            


   Coalition Senators Additional Comments   


      Recommendation     1   


   The government should consult closely and continuously with a wide range of industry stakeholders to ensure the roll-out and implementation of the CDR occurs carefully and orderly, ensuring the best possible benefit to consumers and businesses.   


       Australian Government response    


      t    he Government         supports         this recommendation.   


   The Government consults with a wide range of industry stakeholders in relation to the CDR     on a regular basis. This includes     Treasury’s     regular     CDR     Engagement     Forums with     data holders, data recipients, prospective CDR participants     and other stakeholders. Treasury     also engages with stakeholders in other settings    ,     such as     bilateral meetings and     public consultation processes     in relation to CDR regulatory reforms    .   


   The Government will continue to consult with stakeholders as needed to support the     reset of the CDR to ensure Australians can unlock the value of their data.   


      Recommendation     2   


   The government undertakes regular legislative reviews of the CDR legislation, guided by measurable market outputs from the scheme along with consumer uptake.   


       Australian Government response    


      t    he Government         supports         this recommendation.   


   The Government regularly reviews the CDR legislative framework, including the regulations and the rules, informed by     feedback from stakeholders. Since 2022, the Government has conducted more than 10 consultation processes in relation to the CDR framework.     Through     these consultation processes,     stakeholders have provided valuable feedback about the market outputs from the CDR and consumer uptake.   


   Treasury also works closely with other CDR agencies including the Data Standards Body, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission and the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner to     continuously     monitor the CDR ecosystem including key measures and indicators.   


   The Government will continue to review the CDR framework     throughout     the   
  reset  
   of the CDR.      

              


      