4i;1 , lr/,,it, r,,,.i, ,i, I
, -tl Ãf i n|j.,.t ,t r.
,¡ e u "j - U t)
it"lu
.-.--.. .--. .-.r_.lt-::- ,
Response of the Speaker to the House Standing Committee on Procedure's
August 2023 repotl, Raising the Standarfl recommendations 3 and 4
Most recommendations in the committee's report concern changes to the standing orders
and are therefore a matter for the House to consider. Recommendations 3 and 4 were
addressed to the Speaker and/or the Department of the House of Representatives, and are
responded to below.
Recommendation 3:
3.115 The Committee recommends that the Department of the House of Representatives
review the guidance material and traíning available to Members to ensure Members
are aware:
a words that are sexist, racist, homophobic and otherwise exclusionary or
discriminatory are considered offensive words under standing order 89.
a disorderly conduct under standing order 91 includes acts of bullying and sexual
harassment in the Chamber, and
a under standing order 92(b), a Member may draw the Speaker's attent¡on to the
conduct of a Member.
Response
Agreed.
The Department of the House of Representatives will review the guidance material and
training available to Members to ensure it includes information about offensive words and
disorderly conduct,
As noted by the Committee in its report, the department currently provides multiple training
opportunities and a wide range of guidance material for Members. This includes:
.
an induction program for Members newly elected to Par¡iament, with sessions on
Members'work in the House and Federation Chamber, and with committees,
delivered by senior departmental staff
o
publications including House of Representatives Practice, Guide to Procedures and
lnfosheets
¡
internal resources such as Members'Nofes, Speaker's Panel Notes and short videos
on parliamentary pract¡ce and procedure
r
guides for chairs, deputy chairs and members of parliamentary committees, and
.
procedural information sessions and 'House Briefing'seminars, delivered by senior
departmental staff during s¡tting weeks.
The department tailors the content of each induction program and procedural information
session and will ensure that, where relevant, future training opportunities provide information
about the range of language and conduct that is considered to be offensive or disorderly.
Written guidance material is routinely reviewed and updated, and the department will revise
publications as appropriate to include relevant information and precedents about offensive
language and disorderly conduct.
Recommendation 4:
3.116 The Comrnittee recommends that the speaker and the Department of the House of
Representatives ensure guidance for members of the Speaker's Panel, and for
chairs and deputy chairs of parliamentary comm¡ttees, is updated to reflect any
changes to standing orders made from recommendat¡ons in this report.
Response
Agreed.
The Department of the House of Representatives will continue to ma¡nta¡n a watching brief
on the standing or:ders and ensure that any changes are reflected in the training and
guidance material available to Members, noting the particular needs of members of the
Speaker's Panel, and chairs änd deputy chairs of parliamentary comm¡ttees.
