Australian Government response to the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and
Financial Services report:
Inquiry into 2019-2020 annual reports of bodies
established under the ASIC Act
December 2024
Introduction | 1
Introduction
The Parliamentary Committee’s duties under subsection 243(b) of the Australian Securities and
Investment Commission ACT 2001 (ASIC Act) is to examine each annual report that is prepared by a
body established by this Act and of which a copy had been laid before a House, and to report to
both Houses on matters that appear in, or arise out of, that annual report and to which, in the
Parliamentary Committee’s opinion, the Parliament’s attention should be directed.
In August 2021, the Parliamentary Committee examined the annual reports of bodies established by
the ASIC Act. Below you will find the four recommendations, including the Australian Government
Response to each recommendation.
Response to the recommendations
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends the Takeovers Panel report on the use (or non-use) of its
information-gathering powers in its future annual reports.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation. However, given the passage of time since this
report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends the Companies Auditors Disciplinary Board report on the use (or
non-use) of its information-gathering powers in its future annual reports.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation. However, given the passage of time since this
report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends the Financial Reporting Council be more explicit in its annual report
in detailing how its work furthers the achievement of all the objects set out in section 224 of the
Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act 2001.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation. However, given the passage of time since this
report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends the Financial Reporting Council either include more detailed
information or note that no advice or feedback was given to either the Australian Accounting
Standards Board and the Auditing and Assurance Standards Board with respect to the
requirements of subsection 235B(2) of the Australian Securities and Investments Commission Act
2001.
Australian Government response
The Government notes this recommendation. However, given the passage of time since this
report was tabled, a substantive Government response is no longer appropriate.
