Australian Government response to the
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee report:
Family Law Amendment Bill 2024
JANUARY 2025
MAJORITY COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation 1(a) Accepted in principle.
The committee recommends that: The Family Law Amendment Act 2024 includes amendments introduced by the Government, and
• proposed paragraphs 79(6)(b) and 90SM(6)(b) be amended passed by the Parliament, that permit the family law courts to transfer a companion animal to a
to replace ‘sold’ with ‘rehome’. person or entity who has consented to the transfer. Under the Family Law Act, family law courts
are empowered to make orders altering interests in property. The ordinary meaning of ‘rehome’
does not necessarily require a transfer of ownership (for example, the companion animal’s
residence has changed, but their ownership has not). Using ‘transfer’ rather than ‘rehome’
permits the broadest range of orders to be made about a companion animal.
Recommendation 1(b) Accepted.
The committee recommends that: The Family Law Amendment Act 2024 includes amendments introduced by the Government, and
• proposed subsections79(6) and 90SM(6) be amended to passed by the Parliament, to clarify that the family law courts are able to make interim orders
clearly state that the court has the power to make interim with respect to companion animals. This is consistent with the court’s powers in respect to other
orders with respect to companion animals. types of property.
Recommendation 2 Noted.
The committee recommends that in developing the Accreditation The Attorney-General’s Department is currently preparing an impact analysis for the new
Rules for Children’s Contact Services, the Commonwealth regulatory measures. The outcomes of the Impact Analysis and associated consultation processes
government consults with relevant stakeholders and gives serious will guide the development and establishment of the accreditation rules for CCS.
consideration to introducing accreditation obligations at the
organisational level.
Recommendation 3 Accepted.
The committee recommends that subsection 44(1B) of the Family The Family Law Amendment Act 2024 includes amendments introduced by the Government, and
Law Act 1975 is repealed thereby removing the requirement that passed by the Parliament, that will repeal subsections 44(1B) and 44(1C) to remove barriers to
couples must undergo counselling before applying for divorce if divorce for parties married for less than two years. These provisions require parties to show they
they have been married for less than two years. have considered reconciliation with the assistance of a professional, such as a marriage
counsellor, and to seek leave from the court to file an application for divorce. This creates
additional stress, costs and risk to the safety of victim/survivors of family violence. The
requirement that a couple must be separated for 12 months before applying for a divorce order,
irrespective of how long they have been married, will remain.
Recommendation 4 Accepted in part.
The committee recommends that Schedule 3, Part 5 of the Bill, The Government does not agree with the Committee’s proposal to create a leave requirement
which deals with protected confidences, is amended to require
that the party seeking access to a protected confidence is required for parties seeking access to a protected confidence to show they are relevant to, and necessary
to show they are relevant to, and necessary for, the proceedings for, proceedings prior to their production.
prior to their production.
A test for relevance prior to the production of a subpoena is unlikely to provide protection for
confiders in the way intended by this recommendation as it would necessarily involve a much
The committee recommends that in relation to Schedule 3, Part 5 lower threshold than the court being asked to determine whether the desirability of the evidence
of the Bill, the following safeguards in relation to seeking access to outweighs the likely harm to the confider or a child.
a protected confidence be developed:
In addition, the resource impost on parties and the courts would be considerable, resulting in
• having the Attorney-General’s Department work with
delays to parties seeking outcomes in the family court system.
courts to ensure appropriate awareness of the measure is
achieved through education and information given to The Government agrees with the Committee’s recommendation in relation to education and
parties; awareness, and will commence work on this. The Government agrees with the recommendation
• having the Explanatory Memorandum clarify what to clarify what constitutes a specialist service, and tabled an addendum to the explanatory
constitutes a specialist service; and memorandum to achieve this. The Government also agrees, and the Parliament passed,
• expanding the consent provision to make it clear consent amendments to expand the consent provision in the Bill to make it clear that consent can be
can be given in relation to all or part of the records. given in relation to all or part of the records.
Recommendation 5 Noted.
• Subject to the preceding recommendations, the On 28 November 2024, the Senate passed the Bill with Government amendments. Following
committee recommends that the Senate passes the Bill. passage of the Bill through Parliament on 29 November 2024, the Family Law Amendment Act
2024 received the Royal Assent on 10 December 2024.
SENATOR PAUL SCARR’S RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation 1 Noted.
It is recommended that the government should carefully consider The Government has given further consideration to the issues raised by the inquiry, including by
the concerns raised during this inquiry in relation to the operation proposing a number of further amendments to strengthen the provisions.
of the protected confidence provisions. If practical, further urgent
The issues raised by stakeholders in relation to the onus of proof in relation to protected
consultation should occur with relevant service providers and
confidences applications have been well ventilated, including in response to:
stakeholders who have raised concerns with respect to the
protected confider bearing the onus of proof, including the • the Exposure Draft of the Family Law Amendment Bill 2023, and
practical obstacles to a protected confider making the relevant • further consultation in relation to the Family Law Amendment Bill 2024.
application to the court. Subject to the results of such consultation,
As such, the Government does not agree that urgent further consultation on the issue of the
the Bill should be passed.
onus is required at this stage.
The Government acknowledges the practical obstacles a victim-survivor, or person with limited
capacity, may face in making an application to the court to protect their information. However,
there are also significant risks with an alternative approach which would place an automatic
restriction on protected confidences evidence.
The Attorney-General’s Department will undertake education and awareness raising of this
measure, with a particular focus on ensuring it is easy for a litigant to understand when an
application can be made, and how to undertake the process.
Recommendation 2 Accepted in principle.
Following passage of the Bill, the government should implement a The Government agrees that it will be important to monitor and review the implementation of
programme of real time review of the operation of the protected these provisions, particularly in relation to their accessibility and any unintended impacts on
confidence provisions having regard to the concerns raised during providers of health and specialist sexual and family violence services. The Attorney-General’s
this inquiry. Department will engage relevant stakeholders, including from the family law services and health
sector, in an interim review of the implementation of the provisions 12 months after their
commencement.
