Australian Government response to the
Select Committee on Autism report:
Services, support and life outcomes for autistic Australians
DECEMBER 2022
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the Senate Select Committee on Autism
(the committee) final report from their inquiry into services, support and life outcomes for
autistic Australians.
The Australian Government is committed to improving services and outcomes for all
Australians with disability, including autistic Australians.
The committee tabled their final report on Friday 25 March 2022. The report makes
81 recommendations and 5 dissenting recommendations. The committee supports the
development of a person and family-centred National Autism Strategy that establishes a clear
roadmap, with specific goals and targets, to drive comprehensive and coordinated efforts
to improve life outcomes for autistic people.
The committee recommends the National Autism Strategy be co-designed by the autistic
community and address whole-of-life needs for all autistic people, and include targeted
actions to support priority cohorts.
Key priorities identified by the committee include:
 building understanding of autism within key professions and across the wider
community;
 improving access to early diagnosis and intervention;
 improving service integration and coordination;
 improving education, employment and health services for autistic people;
 supporting parents and carers; and
 establishing a national autism research agenda.
The Australian Government supports the development of a National Autism Strategy.
The Australian Government supports, or supports in principle, or partially supports, 73 of the
committee’s recommendations, and 3 of the dissenting report recommendations.
The Australian Government does not support 2 of the committee’s recommendations and
noted an additional 6, and noted 2 of the dissenting report recommendations.
The Australian Government acknowledges that people use many terms when referring to
autism, and that each individual will have a preferred way of communicating and
self-describing. There are people in the autistic community who either prefer the terms
‘identity first language;’ or ‘people first language’ or interchange between both.
The Australian Government has used identity first language in this response, to ensure
consistency with the committee’s final report and its terms of reference.
2
Inquiry into services, support and life outcomes for
autistic Australians
Recommendations made by the committee
A National Autism Strategy
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that the Australian Government develop
a National Autism Strategy and accompanying implementation within 12 months
to drive nationally-coordinated action to improve services and supports for autistic
Australians. The National Autism Strategy should:
 be both person-and family-centred;
 address whole-of-life needs for people across the breadth of the spectrum;
 align with other national strategies, including the National Disability
Strategy; and
 be informed by the recommendations of this inquiry and the Disability
Royal Commission.
Supported
The Australian Government supports this recommendation and will work to develop and
implement a National Autism Strategy within 12 months with an aim to improving services
and supports for autistic Australians. The Government notes, to allow for extensive sector
consultation on all components, it may take longer than 12 months to be developed and
implemented in full.
Development of a National Autism Strategy should provide a coordinated, long-term
approach to how governments work to improve outcomes for autistic people.
A National Autism Strategy should also clearly identify how it will contribute to achieving
the outcomes of the Australia’s Disability Strategy 2021-31 (Australia’s Disability Strategy)
and maintain a continued focus on intersectionality enabling a more accurate, accessible and
culturally sensitive understanding and response to the needs of all Australians. It should also
clearly identify how it will contribute to achieving the outcomes of the Early Years Strategy
for autistic children.
3
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends that development of a National Autism Strategy be driven by
a national taskforce established under the auspices of the National Federation Reform
Council. The taskforce should adopt a co-design approach drawing on the autistic
community, as well as parents, carers, researchers, and policy makers.
The definition of co-design, and the principles underpinning it, should be agreed at the start
of the development process.
Partially Supported
The Australian Government supports this recommendation and will work with state and
territory governments to ensure the development of a National Autism Strategy adopts
a co-design approach and is driven by, and in close consultation with, autistic people,
their families and carers, advocates, peak bodies, researchers, and policy makers.
The approach to its development and underpinning principles will be agreed at the start of the
process with all stakeholders.
The Conran Review of the Council of Australian Governments (COAG), Ministerial Forums
and Councils (the Conran Review) aimed to reduce the number of ministers’ meetings,
related forums and streamlining intergovernmental bodies. The Australian Government notes
that where there are suitable existing forums, these should be used in the first instance
to progress any new priorities and ensure alignment with the Conran Review.
Development of a National Autism Strategy should be driven within one of the suitable
existing forums which include the Australian, state and territory governments.
Where an existing forum is used, oversight processes will already be in place that can oversee
the work of the forum and the development of a strategy with a key priority to ensure
a co-design approach is adhered to.
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends that the National Autism Strategy and accompanying
implementation plan include an outcomes framework, as well as specific and measurable
actions, targets and milestones. Where appropriate, the framework and measurable items
should align with those in other national strategies.
Supported
The Australian Government supports the development of a National Autism Strategy and
accompanying implementation plan. It is envisaged this will include an outcomes framework
with specific and measurable actions, accountabilities, targets and milestones that will align
with other national strategies, including Australia’s Disability Strategy outcomes framework.
4
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the taskforce monitor and report annually on the
implementation of the National Autism Strategy.
Supported in principle
Annual reporting on the implementation of a National Autism Strategy, through governance
designed to support and oversee the implementation of the strategy will be developed.
As noted in the response to Recommendation 2, the Australian Government will consider the
most appropriate forum to oversee development of the strategy.
Recommendation 5
The committee recommends that an independent review of the National Autism Strategy be
undertaken three years after implementation begins, with the findings to be publicly
released and used to inform the next iteration of the strategy.
Supported in principle
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in principle. An independent
review of the National Autism Strategy will be considered as part of the development of the
strategy.
The adequacy of available services and supports
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends the Joint Steering Committee on the National Disability
Insurance Scheme (NDIS) undertake an inquiry into the experiences of autistic participants
in the NDIS with particular focus on:
 The level of reasonable and necessary supports required by autistic
participants across the course of their life;
 Whether the NDIS is currently funding these reasonable and necessary
supports;
 The implementation of the new Early Childhood Approach;
 Whether adequate information and support is being provided to
participants and prospective participants in a timely manner;
 How autism diagnosis is recognised by the NDIS;
 The ability and capacity of planners to make informed decisions regarding
the reasonable and necessary supports to be funded by the NDIS;
 The level of under-utilisation in NDIS plans for autistic participants;
 Ensuring there is sufficient service capacity to deliver funded supports;
and
 How the NDIS interacts with other government funded support services –
such as education, employment and health services – to provide
coordinated and holistic care for autistic participants.
5
Supported in principle
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in principle and the intention
to initiate a Joint Standing Committee (JSC) inquiry into the experiences of autistic
participants in the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS). The Australian Government
is committed to delivering a better and fairer NDIS, and welcomes the opportunity to work
with the JSC as the inquiry proceeds.
While the NDIS plays a significant role in supporting the independence and social and
economic participation of eligible Australians with permanent and significant disability,
it is not designed to duplicate or replace other government funded mainstream services and
community supports. The NDIS should be complementary to, and work alongside, existing
mainstream and community services and supports.
All levels of government continue to play a role in providing mainstream and targeted
services, supports and infrastructure systems to people with disability.
The Australian Government supports all levels of government working together to ensure
supports for autistic Australians are coordinated and integrated to the greatest extent possible.
Any inquiry into the interaction of the NDIS with other government funded support services
should take account of recent and ongoing consultation activities in this area to ensure
participants are not burdened with duplicative engagement processes.
The National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013 sets out disability criteria and early
intervention requirements for deciding the eligibility of applicants to be supported by the
NDIS. A person’s NDIS eligibility is not based on types of disability or the presence
of an underlying condition, illness or injury. Rather, eligibility is based on evidence a person
has substantially reduced functional capacity affecting their communication,
social interaction, learning, mobility, self-care or self-management because of their disability
or would benefit from the provision of early intervention supports.
The National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA) is also working with people with
disability and the broader disability community to co-design a new person-centred model
of gathering information for access and planning decisions, known as the
Information Gathering for Access and Planning (IGAP).
The IGAP Steering Committee continues to meet regularly to provide guidance for the
project, including representatives from the NDIS Independent Advisory Council,
Disability and Carer Representative Organisations, participants, Commonwealth agencies and
states and territories. The Steering Committee has also engaged the disability community to
understand people’s access and planning experiences, including through targeted focus
groups and an online survey which is open to everyone.
6
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends that the National Autism Strategy identify actions to drive
better integration between federal and state service systems, including a roadmap to better
integrate NDIS and mainstream services. This roadmap should be consistent with the
recommendations made by the Joint Standing Committee on the NDIS in relation to
service integration and overlap with other systems.
Supported in principle
In 2015, all governments agreed to the ‘Principles to determine the responsibilities of the
NDIS and other service systems’ (‘the Principles’). In addition to these six general principles,
all governments agreed to the Applied Principles and Tables of Support (APTOS) which are
used as a guide to determine the funding and delivery responsibilities of other service systems
and the NDIS. The APTOS also outlines how these systems can work together to support the
vision of an inclusive Australian society.
The Australian Government continues to work with state and territory governments
to integrate NDIS and mainstream services. Through the former Disability Reform Council
and the current Disability Reform Ministers’ Meetings, significant progress has been made
to better integrate the NDIS with health, child protection, transport, justice, school and mental
health mainstream systems.
The NDIA seeks to work in partnership with these service systems, and where possible will
assist a participant to learn about other non-NDIS services that may be available in their local
community, including through the NDIA, Partners in the Community.
The NDIA also continues to work with state and territory representatives to improve
information sharing to support the effective delivery of the NDIS and mainstream services.
Initiatives include:
 The NDIA Complex Support Needs Pathway to support participants with complex
support needs, including those that interact with other service systems;
 The NDIA’s younger people in residential aged care team established to prevent
younger NDIS participants from entering aged care and to support those living in aged
care to leave;
 The introduction of Liaison Officers, as a conduit between the NDIA and state and
territory health and justice systems, supporting existing and prospective participants;
and
 Standing quarterly meetings with senior officials from each state and territory,
attended by senior staff from the NDIA to discuss and resolve operational issues
between the NDIS and state or territory programs and services.
7
The National Health Reform Agreement (NHRA) 2020-25 includes shared commitments
from Australian, state and territory governments regarding the interfaces between health and
disability systems. This includes hospital and NDIS service integration. Priority activities
include:
 Developing national indicators and data sets to monitor performance, identify barriers
and gaps, and inform solutions; and
 Clarifying governance arrangements for monitoring and resolving policy and
operational issues between health and disability systems.
Additionally, a key area of the Australia’s Disability Strategy, Safety Targeted Action Plan,
is to strengthen the interface between the NDIS and mainstream service systems with the aim
to improve the design of government service systems and supports for people with disability
at risk of harm.
To date, this work has focussed on improving data collection and reporting to better identify
issues and barriers, inform solutions and support health workers’ decision making.
Recommendation 8
The committee recommends that the National Disability Insurance Agency provide
support coordination assistance as a default inclusion in plans for autistic NDIS
participants who:
 have complex or high care needs;
 are from other identified disadvantaged and vulnerable cohorts; and
 have significantly underutilised plans.
One year of support coordination assistance should also be a default inclusion in plans for all
new NDIS participants.
Not supported
The Australian Government does not support this recommendation. Funding for an NDIS
participant's plan is based on the reasonable and necessary supports a participant requires.
While support coordination plays an important role in helping NDIS participants to make the
most of their plans and to pursue their goals, it can only be included in a participant’s plan if
it meets the funding criteria in the National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013 and Rules.
The NDIS already provides support for participants to implement their plans through NDIA
Early Childhood Partners and Local Area Coordination services. NDIA partners support
participants to understand the NDIS, create and implement a plan, and assist participants
to understand how the NDIS works with other service systems and what other supports might
be available in the local community.
For those participants for whom support coordination is a reasonable and necessary support,
the NDIA is working to improve participant understanding of the role of support
coordinators, as part of the Participant Service Improvement Plan.
8
As part of this commitment, in 2021 the NDIA reviewed the current support coordination
model and consulted with stakeholders on how support coordination could be improved,
with the report ‘Improving Support Coordination for NDIS Participants’ published on the
NDIS website in November 2021. The report is available at Improving support coordination
for participants. The NDIA has also released guidance on the role of a support coordinator
on the NDIS website.
The NDIA will continue to work with the sector to educate support coordinators on their
roles, and deliver consistency and equity in planning outcomes (including support
coordination).
Recommendation 9
The committee recommends that the National Disability Insurance Agency continue to
improve the capacity of its staff, including Local Area Coordinators, to provide better
support to autistic people. This should include a focus on both understanding and meeting
autistic participants' support coordination needs.
Supported
The NDIA is committed to building the capability of the Agency workforce to deliver
on strategic and operational goals now and into the future. The NDIA has developed training
to provide planners, Early Childhood Partners and Local Area Coordinators with the
confidence and skills to ensure participants are supported to access the NDIS and implement
their plans. The NDIA is also delivering training programs to help frontline staff with
participant check-ins and to have more effective and meaningful conversations with
participants.
Additional work is being undertaken to ensure staff have the right capabilities through the
continuous design and delivery of mandatory eLearning training and induction programs.
The NDIA actively recruits staff with lived experience of disability, including those with
lived experience of autism.
The NDIA has also developed a Disability Navigator and disability snapshots to help NDIA
staff and partners improve their awareness and understanding of the lived experience
of people with disabilities. These resources include interviews with people with disability
talking about their lived experience, and provide advice about how planners and partners can
best communicate with and support people with disability throughout the planning process.
The Disability Navigator includes a disability snapshot on autism, featuring autistic people
providing advice about their strengths, preferred communication methods, and lived
experience.
9
Recommendation 10
The committee recommends that a National Autism Strategy identify actions to increase
community understanding of autism. This should include consideration of a public
education campaign that portrays the diversity of the spectrum and helps improve inclusion
across a range of settings, including schools, workplaces and in the general community.
All materials should be tailored and accessible to First Nations and Culturally and
Linguistically Diverse audiences.
Supported in principle
Actions to increase community understanding of autism will be considered in the
development of a National Autism Strategy alongside action being taken under
Australia’s Disability Strategy to build positive community attitudes. All material will
be tailored and accessible and be appropriate to First Nations and
Culturally and Linguistically Diverse people.
Recommendation 11
The committee recommends that the National Autism Strategy identify actions to promote
awareness of, and access to, quality, evidence-based information about autism for autistic
people, their families, and professionals in autism-related sectors.
Supported
The Australian Government provides supports for a range of resources that promote
awareness of, and access to, quality and evidence-based information about disability,
including autism, for people with disability and their families and carers.
The Australian Government also provides supports for the development of resources for
professionals in autism-related sectors. Actions to further promote awareness of,
and access to, information and resources for autistic people and their families and carers,
will be considered in the development of a National Autism Strategy.
For example, the Information, Linkages and Capacity Building (ILC) grants program
provides funding for a range of autism-specific projects including to Amaze Incorporated for
Autism Connect - a national information service for autistic people, their families and carers,
health professionals, researchers, teachers, employers and the broader community.
The ILC grants program also provides funding to the Autism Cooperative Research Centre
(the Autism CRC) for the National Best-Practice Assessment and Diagnosis project to
develop resources to support mainstream health providers involved in the assessment and
diagnosis of autism. This project builds on the Autism CRC’s National Implementation
Toolkit, a set of resources to promote the National Guideline for the Assessment and
Diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorders in Australia.
The Australian Government has also committed $2 million for the Autism CRC to continue
to be Australia’s leading organisation for autism research, coordination, collaboration
and advice. This commitment will also support development and implementation
of a National Autism Strategy, with a national research agenda and evidence-based practice
platform.
10
Recommendation 12
6.138 The committee recommends that the Australian Government develop guidelines on
autism-friendly service design through the National Autism Strategy in order to
help service providers tailor services and service environments to meet the needs of
autistic individuals.
Supported in principle
The development of guidelines on autism-friendly service design to help service providers
tailor services and service environments to meet the needs of autistic individuals will
be considered in the development of a National Autism Strategy.
Recommendation 13
The committee recommends that a National Autism Workforce Plan be developed
under the auspices of the National Autism Strategy to ensure the supply of
a suitable and appropriate workforce to deliver services for autistic people.
The National Autism Workforce Plan should identify actions, accompanied by clear
and measurable outcomes, to:
 improve data around current and future workforce gaps and shortages
(as they relate to the needs of the autism community);
 attract, train and retain workers in identified areas of shortage
(both geographic and sector/profession-specific);
 increase autism content in relevant undergraduate training courses;
 develop accredited autism-specific short courses (or promote existing
accredited courses) for current workers; and
 embed autism as part of ongoing professional development requirements
related to professional registration.
Where appropriate, the National Autism Workforce Plan should align with existing
workforce strategies, including the NDIS National Workforce Plan: 2021–2025.
Supported in principle
A suitable and appropriate workforce to deliver services for autistic people, both inside and
outside the NDIS, will be considered in the development of a National Autism Strategy.
The Australian Government is committed to delivering the NDIS so that Australians with
disability are supported to meet their needs and have equal opportunities.
The Australian Government will also develop a new comprehensive
NDIS Workforce Strategy that addresses key workforce pressures resulting in shortages,
including for the workforce supporting autistic people. The NDIS Workforce Strategy will
be informed by the consultations for the development of a National Autism Strategy,
and align with other key strategies including the Closing the Gap’s Strategic Plan for Funding
the Development of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Community Controlled Sector.
11
Recommendation 14
The committee recommends that the Department of Home Affairs work with the
Departments of Social Services, Health, and Education, Skills and Training, as well as the
National Disability Insurance Agency, to ensure current skilled migration arrangements
facilitate migration to fill identified autism workforce shortages.
Supported
The Department of Home Affairs will work with the Departments of Social Services,
Health and Aged Care, and Education, Jobs and Skills Australia, as well as the NDIA, to
support the sector’s need for specialist skilled labour that cannot be sourced in Australia,
through the use of existing skilled visa arrangements.
Recommendation 15
The committee recommends that the National Autism Strategy include measures to allow
for monitoring and reporting of the social inclusion of autistic people within the
community.
Supported in principle
Measures to allow for monitoring and reporting of the social inclusion of autistic people
within the community will be considered in the development of a National Autism Strategy.
Recommendation 16
The committee recommends that peer-to-peer networking and support projects continue to
be funded as a priority under the Department of Social Services’ Information, Linkages and
Capacity Building program.
Supported in principle
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in principle and acknowledges the
importance of peer-to-peer activities in supporting people with disability, their families and
carers.
The aim of the Individual Capacity Building (ICB) Program under the Information Linkages
and Capacity Building (ILC) program is designed to provide people with disability the skills
and confidence to participate and contribute to the community and protect their rights.
The ICB Program achieves this by enabling systematic access to peer support, mentoring and
other skills building for people with disability, carers and families, to develop their individual
capacity. This includes activities that empower a person to be independent and to engage in
social, economic and community life.
Consideration will be given to prioritising these projects for funding as part of the review
of the ILC Strategy that is underway.
12
Recommendation 17
The committee recommends that online resources be developed by existing autism
education and advocacy organisations—funded through the Department of Social Services’
Information, Linkages and Capacity Building program—and made widely available to help
community organisations understand how they can actively support and include autistic
people.
Supported in principle
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in principle and acknowledges the
importance of online resources being developed and made available to individuals and
organisations. Advocacy groups play a significant role in this regard.
The Information Linkages and Capacity Building (ILC) program predominately provides
funding to organisations through one off grants, awarded through competitive rounds,
to deliver projects in the community that benefit all Australians with disability.
Funding is not ongoing and organisations are expected to have plans in place to enable
activities to be sustainable once grants cease.
Grant rounds are administered according to the Commonwealth Grant Rules and Guidelines
(CGRGs), made under the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013.
The probity principles of the CGRGs require all applicants to be treated in an open, fair and
transparent manner. In keeping with this framework, all applications are to be received and
processed in accordance with the relevant published Grant Opportunity Guidelines.
All eligible organisations, including autism-specific education and advocacy groups,
would be open to apply for any available grant round.
Supports and services for specialised groups
Recommendation 18
The committee recommends that the National Autism Strategy include a focus on
meeting the needs of all autistic people. This should include a particular focus on
the provision of adequate and appropriate services for autistic adults, women and
girls, as well as disadvantaged and vulnerable cohorts of autistic people such as:
 people from lower socio-economic backgrounds;
 people in regional and remote locations;
 First Nations people;
 people from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds;
 gender diverse and non-heterosexual people; and
 people with complex needs.
Supported
The Australian Government agrees a National Autism Strategy should include a particular
focus on meeting the needs of all autistic people, including autistic adults, women and girls,
as well as disadvantaged and priority cohorts. This will include identifying opportunities
to tailor approaches to assist autistic people who face intersectional barriers.
Through adopting a focus on intersectionality, this would ensure a stronger focus on the
intersecting and often reinforcing experiences of autistic people more broadly.
13
Development of a National Autism Strategy should also consider NDIS strategies that guide
the NDIA’s work in supporting NDIS participants. These strategies, which include the
Culturally and Linguistically Diverse, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander,
Rural and Remote, and LGBTIQA+ strategies, are expected to be reviewed and refreshed
from 2022-2023. The NDIA will ensure the reviews of these strategies align with work
to develop a National Autism Strategy.
Recommendation 19
The committee recommends that the National Autism Strategy include specific actions to
improve access to services in regional and remote areas. This should include options for
remote service delivery (such as telehealth), as well as working with relevant medical
colleges and professional bodies to increase the supply and retention of clinicians and
allied health professionals available to work in regional and remote locations.
Supported in principle
The inclusion of specific actions to improve access to services in regional and remote areas
for all autistic people, both inside and outside the NDIS, will be considered in the
development of a National Autism Strategy.
Providing services to people in remote and very remote areas is a whole-of-government
challenge, as there are broader systemic challenges facing these more isolated communities.
Consultations and feedback from other agencies and trial sites have recognised some of the
unique circumstances which may be driving this disparity.
The Closing the Gap Disability Sector Strengthening Plan (the Plan) seeks to provide
a framework for all levels of government to strengthen the community-controlled disability
sector and ensure better access to services. The Plan has a strong focus on and support
of First Nations people with disability living in regional, remote and very remote areas.
Jurisdictions’ Implementation Plans will include actions to implement this Plan.
The National Autism Strategy will also align with the Plan.
Recommendation 20
The committee recommends that the National Autism Strategy include specific
actions to improve access to services for First Nations peoples. This should include
building the capacity of Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisations to
deliver autism services in First Nations communities, as well as trialling the use of
alternative care models, such as those in place to support individuals with Foetal
Alcohol Spectrum Disorders.
In addition, the taskforce established to develop the National Autism Strategy
should include First Nations representation.
Supported
The Australian Government supports this recommendation. Representation of First Nations
people with disability to support the development and implementation
of a National Autism Strategy will be meaningful, gender sensitive, culturally appropriate and
determined in consultation with key stakeholders, including but not limited to the
First Peoples Disability Network (FPDN).
14
The Australian Government will implement this recommendation by adopting a social model
of disability as well as a cultural model of inclusion, aligning with Australia’s Disability
Strategy and the Closing the Gap Disability Sector Strengthening Plan (DSSP). This will
allow services provided by Aboriginal Community Controlled Organisations (ACCOs) and
Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisations (ACCHOs) to be more reflective of
the lived experience, unique needs and inherent strengths and capacities of First Nations
people with disability, their families and broader communities.
The DSSP was co-designed with the FPDN and provides a National Framework and key
guidance to all levels of government for strengthening the community controlled sector and
services available to First Nations people with disability, with a strong focus on and support
of First Nations people with disability living in regional, remote and very remote areas.
The DSSP is a key commitment under Priority Reform 2, of the National Agreement on
Closing the Gap.
The DSSP also seeks to align its activities with other national strategies, frameworks and
reform agendas underway, including Australia’s Disability Strategy, state and territory
disability strategies and the forthcoming final report of the Royal Commission into Violence,
Abuse, Neglect and Exploitation of People with Disability. The National Autism Strategy
will align with the DSSP and other related national frameworks for First Nations People with
disability.
Additionally, the NDIA is delivering improved NDIS services via ACCHOs, including:
 An Australian Government investment of $5.9 million in the NDIS Ready project to
increase ACCHOs registrations to deliver NDIS services.
 An additional $4.5 million provided to ACCHOs through the National Aboriginal
Community Controlled Health Organisation, to better connect First Nations people
with disability to the NDIS through the Aboriginal Disability Liaison Officer
program.
 The NDIA is providing funding of $13.8 million annually through the
Remote Community Connector program to Aboriginal Controlled Organisations
(primarily Aboriginal Medical Services and Aboriginal Shire Councils) in remote
areas to improve access to the NDIS. The program is undergoing expansion,
with an additional $3.5 million planned for the 2022-23 financial year.
 The Agency is working closely with First Nations service partners to enhance and
improve the Remote Community Connector Program and to embed co-design in the
NDIA approach. The NDIA is working in partnership with people with lived
experience of disability through the Independent Advisory Council and disability
representative organisations on co-design projects, including on a refresh of the
NDIS First Nations Strategy.
To improve early childhood services for children with developmental delay or disability
in remote areas, the NDIA is funding the Torres Cape Hospital and Health Service
$4.3 million to expand services in the Torres Strait Islands and Northern Peninsula Area
of Far North Queensland.
15
Recommendation 21
The committee recommends that, as a priority, all governments through the National
Federation Reform Council review their approaches to coordinating service delivery for
autistic people with complex needs and implement actions to ensure integrated and
appropriate support for individuals and families with complex support needs, particularly
during times of crisis.
Supported in principle
Approaches to coordinating service delivery for autistic people with complex needs,
and actions to ensure integrated and appropriate support for individuals and families with
complex support needs, particularly in times of crisis, will be considered in the introduction
of the central coordination of disability. This will ensure real action and recognition for all
Australians with disability, not just NDIS participants.
The NDIA Complex Support Needs Pathway supports participants with complex support
needs (including those with autism), which commonly involves supporting their interaction
with multiple service systems. In addition, participants with complex support needs
(including those with autism), are funded for support coordination, providing additional
support and contact between service providers and participants and their families and carers.
Support coordinators may be used in times of crisis to support individuals and families
connect with mainstream services and NDIS supports.
The NDIA has also introduced Liaison Officers, who are the conduit between the NDIA and
state and territory health and justice systems, supporting existing and prospective NDIS
participants.
To support participants in times of crisis, the NDIA has committed funding over up to three
years for the provision of a national After Hours Crisis Referral Service (AHCRS).
The purpose of the AHCRS is to work closely with an NDIS participant in crisis,
share pertinent information with emergency services, navigate reasonable support options and
reduce social admissions into hospital or other emergency services because of a breakdown
of disability related supports.
The AHCRS provider operates a national telephone based service and is able to respond
to requests for assistance from state and territory government emergency services.
These services include police, ambulances and hospitals.
NDIS participants aged 18 years and over, NDIS participants included in the
Voluntary Out of Home Care cohort, and children with supports at risk due to their disability
support needs, can access the service.
Recommendation 22
The committee recommends that the National Autism Strategy recognise the vital role that
families, parents and carers play in supporting autistic individuals.
Supported in principle
The role of families, parents and carers in supporting autistic individuals will be recognised
in the development of a National Autism Strategy.
16
Recommendation 23
The committee recommends that the National Disability Insurance Agency work with
stakeholders and experts to:
 clarify the operation of the 'ordinary role of parenting' principle,
recognising the significant additional responsibilities borne by parents and
carers of autistic individuals; and
 institute a family-centred approach to planning that extends beyond the
Early Childhood Approach and is supported by training in family-centred
approaches for National Disability Insurance Scheme Planners, Local
Area Coordinators, and Support Coordinators.
Partially supported
This recommendation is partially supported.
Provisions recognising the importance of family and carers to NDIS participants were
included in the National Disability Insurance Scheme Amendment (Participant Service
Guarantee and Other Measures) Act 2022 (the Act), which commenced on 1 July 2022.
These include a new guiding principle for the administration of the Act (subsection 4(12A),
that the relationship between participants and their families and carers be recognised and
respected in plan preparation, plan review and management of funding (paragraph 31(ca)),
and giving priority in the above activities to strengthen and build the capacity of families and
carers to support participants who are children (paragraph 31(d)).
The NDIA is committed to working closely with participants, their families and carers and
the wider disability community to deliver the best NDIS possible.
The NDIA has also clarified the ‘ordinary role of parenting’ in the Reasonable and Necessary
Supports Guideline, which sets out the specific criteria considered by NDIA planners when
determining what is reasonable to expect informal supports, including the parents and
caregivers of young children, to provide.
The NDIA will continue to engage with the Independent Advisory Council to the NDIS
on how to best support families and carers in their roles.
Recommendation 24
The committee recommends that the National Disability Insurance Agency publish its
guidance for planners regarding the role of caregivers and families to improve transparency
and consistency of support provided.
Supported
The Australian Government supports this recommendation. In 2021 the NDIA published its
guidance for planners regarding the role of caregivers and families. The NDIS Operational
Guideline sets out how the NDIA considers informal supports, and interacts with families and
caregivers throughout the planning process.
17
The Reasonable and Necessary Supports Guideline sets out how the NDIA determines what
is reasonable for informal supports to provide, while the Early Childhood Guideline sets out
how the NDIA works with the families and caregivers and young children receiving supports
under the Early Childhood approach. These guidelines are available at: NDIS Guidelines.
The NDIA has also published a suite of information on its website, which sets out how the
Agency works with families and carers of participants. This includes the NDIA’s approach to
children younger than 7 years, supports available to carers from other government agencies,
assistance on how to deal with the death of a loved one in the NDIS, the roles of participant
guardians and nominees and how participants can transition to more appropriate
accommodation, from residential aged care facilities. Further information is available here:
For families and carers | NDIS.
Recommendation 25
The committee recommends that state and territory governments undertake a mapping of
respite and support services for parents and work with government and non-government
providers to address identified gaps in support.
Supported in principle
This is a matter for state and territory government consideration.
The Australian Government notes there are existing measures in place to assist and provide
support for all carers through the Carer Gateway. Carer Gateway is an
Australian Government initiative providing a range of free in-person, online and phone-based
supports and services to carers. The purpose of Carer Gateway is to provide services and
support for all carers in their own right, regardless of the age or condition of their care
recipient. Services include: carer needs and support planning; counselling; peer support;
carer directed support packages; emergency respite; coaching; information and advice;
and assistance with navigating and accessing relevant local and Australian Government
services.
Through Carer Gateway, carers can access planned respite through Carer Directed Support
packages brokered by Carer Gateway service providers. The Carer Directed Support service
is a consumer directed approach to supporting carers in their caring role. It gives carers
a greater say and more control over the design and delivery of the support provided to them
and the care recipient.
Carers may also access respite through their care recipient’s packages, including care
recipients who are engaged with the NDIS.
18
Research and data
Recommendation 26
The committee recommends that a National Autism Research Framework be agreed under
the auspices of the National Autism Strategy. This framework should be:
 based, as a starting point, on the research priorities agreed by the
Australian Autism Research Council;
 informed by the recommendations in this report; and
 compatible with the National Disability Research Agenda being
developed by the National Disability Research Partnership.
Supported in principle
A proposed National Autism Research Framework will be considered in the development
of a National Autism Strategy.
The Australian Government supports the committee recommendation that the
proposed National Autism Research Framework be compatible with the
National Disability Research Agenda (NDRA) being developed by the
National Disability Research Partnership (NDRP).
 The NDRP, once fully established, will facilitate a collaborative and inclusive
research agenda through partnerships between academics, people with disability, their
families and carers, peak advocacy groups, governments and service providers.
 The NDRP will also facilitate the translation of disability research into policy and
practice and enhance the research capacity of the disability sector.
Recommendation 27
The committee recommends that the taskforce established to develop the National
Autism Strategy investigate options for improving the collection of data about
autistic people to better inform research, policy and practice in relation to
improving life outcomes for autistic people. This should include:
 exploring the feasibility of establishing a National Autism Register;
 engaging with the Disability Advisory Council to ensure any proposed
activities build on (or are compatible with) the results of the National
Disability Data Asset pilots;
 engaging with the Disability Advisory Council to ensure that data needs in
relation to autistic people are adequately represented in any future
National Disability Data Asset; and
 identifying any gaps in data collection that will not be met by the National
Disability Data Asset.
Supported in principle
The investigation of options for improving the collection of data about autistic people
to inform research, policy and practice to improve life outcomes for autistic people will
be considered in the development of a National Autism Strategy.
19
The Australian and state and territory governments are working together to develop
a National Disability Data Asset (NDDA). The NDDA project proposes to establish
a collection of linked de-identified data held by governments and covering multiple service
systems. The aim is to better understand how people with disability are supported through
services, payments and programs, and what outcomes are experienced. The NDDA project
will build on the findings of the 18-month NDDA Pilot phase, which concluded
on 31 December 2021.
The NDDA project is intended to be a truly national project involving collaboration between
all governments and with the disability community. Engagement with the disability
community for the NDDA project will be informed by the Disability Advisory Council
recommendations.
The Australian Government notes that in the process of exploring the feasibility
of establishing a National Autism Register, consideration will be given to the potential scope
of a register (i.e.: collection of administrative data only) compared to the scope of
an outcomes registry (i.e.: collection of outcomes data for the purpose of evaluating and
improving life outcomes for autistic people). Consideration will also be given to piloting how
NDIS data may be used better to inform research, policy and practice to improve life
outcomes for autistic people and to identify gaps in current collections.
Governments are committed to working together alongside people with disability,
communities, businesses and the non-government sector to implement
Australia’s Disability Strategy and realise its vision in a coordinated and targeted way.
This includes the implementation of an Outcomes Framework to track progress against
Australia’s Disability Strategy, a data strategy to support regular reporting and improvements
to evaluation and research.
Under the Outcomes Framework, governments agreed to work together to develop
a comprehensive data improvement plan (DIP) in 2022, which would:
 Ensure data needed to measure outcomes for people with disability is collected,
shared, and progressively improved over the life of Australia’s Disability Strategy.
 Identify where data needs to be linked between systems to improve our understanding
of the impact of Australia’s Disability Strategy.
 The purpose of the DIP is to maintain and improve the level of data quality needed
to continually improve the outcomes for people with disability.
20
Recommendation 28
The committee recommends that the Australian Government prioritise autism research as
part of the National Disability Research Agenda and National Disability Data Asset, given
that autism represents the most prevalent (and fastest growing) primary disability type in
the NDIS. This should include the creation of separate autism-specific funding streams
within existing research grant programs.
Supported in principle
In relation to the National Disability Data Asset (NDDA), the Disability Reform Ministers’
Meeting has agreed the first three national priorities for data sharing and analysis:
1. Reporting obligations for the Australia’s Disability Strategy, Outcomes Framework;
2. Health outcomes for people with disability; and
3. Employment outcomes for people with disability.
It is proposed that future research priorities would be determined via the NDDA governance
forum, to be established, that will include formal input and oversight by disability community
representatives.
In relation to the National Disability Research Agenda (NDRA), the Melbourne Disability
Institute (MDI) is developing a proposed NDRA as part of work supported by
Australian Government establishment funding for an independently governed
National Disability Research Partnership (NDRP). MDI’s work is being guided by a working
party made up of people with disability, researchers from some of Australia’s leading
universities and independent advisors.
The NDRP will independently implement the research agenda after developing priorities
in consultation with the whole disability sector.
Advocacy
Recommendation 29
The committee recommends that the Commonwealth, state and territory
governments re-commit to a national approach to disability advocacy. This should
include:
 reviewing the effectiveness of the National Disability Advocacy
Framework, including the current status of its outputs and reform and
policy directions; and
 updating the National Disability Advocacy Framework to include
performance measures and reporting requirements for each of the outputs
and reform and policy directions.
Supported in principle
On 13 December 2019, the Council of Australian Governments, Disability Reform Council
agreed, with South Australia dissenting, that disability advocacy is a shared responsibility
between the Australian Government and state and territory governments.
21
The Australian Government, and state and territory governments are working collaboratively
to develop a new National Disability Advocacy Framework (NDAF), including incorporating
public consultation feedback. The new NDAF is an inclusive, high-level and principle based
framework which commits the Australian and state and territory governments to work
together to improve access to disability advocacy services for all people with disability.
Recommendation 30
The committee recommends that a National Autism Advocacy Plan be developed
under the auspices of the National Autism Strategy. The National Autism Advocacy
Plan should:
 align with the National Disability Advocacy Framework; and
 identify actions to:
- improve data collection and reporting on the utilisation and
effectiveness of advocacy services for autistic people;
- encourage the growth of autism-specific advocacy services, including
autistic-led services;
- increase the numbers of autistic people appointed to key positions in
all organisations, including autism and disability-related
organisations;
- ensure better understanding of, and advocacy for, the needs of autistic
people with complex presentations; and
- bring together the diverse views and perspectives of the autistic
community to improve advocacy for all autistic people
Supported in principle
Australia’s Disability Strategy recognises advocacy helps safeguard people’s rights and
overcome barriers to their inclusion and participation in the community. The Safety, Rights
and Justice Outcome Area under Australia’s Disability Strategy acknowledges disability
advocacy as being an important way to enable and support people with disability to protect
and uphold their rights. This Outcome Area aims to ensure ‘the rights of people with
disability are promoted, upheld and protected, and people with disability feel safe and enjoy
equality before the law’.
The Australian Government is working with state and territory governments
to develop a Disability Advocacy Work Plan (work plan) to guide implementation of the
National Disability Advocacy Framework (NDAF). Informed by public consultation on the
NDAF, the work plan will identify areas of focus and timelines to enable the
Australian Government to engage in multilateral and bilateral agreements. Areas of focus are
anticipated to include data improvement and sharing, funding arrangements and service
models. The NDAF, work plan and bilateral agreements are being developed to improve
advocacy access and services for all people with disability.
The Australian and state and territory governments are also working together to develop
a National Disability Data Asset (NDDA). The NDDA project proposes to establish
a collection of linked de-identified data held by governments and covering multiple service
systems. The aim is to obtain a better understanding of how people with disability are
supported through services, payments and programs, and what outcomes are experienced.
22
In the future, it is hoped that research and data generated by utilising the NDDA will support
service providers, advocacy organisations, and disability-related organisations among other
groups to make evidence based, data driven decisions to better meet the needs of people they
service.
Recommendation 31
The committee recommends that the proposed National Autism Advocacy Plan
reflects the need for differentiated advocacy services to support the range of
presentations across the spectrum and the stage of life for those autistic people
requiring advocacy.
Supported in principle
The National Disability Advocacy Framework (NDAF), work plan, and bilateral agreements
are being developed by the Australian and state and territory governments to reflect the range
of advocacy services and improve advocacy access and services for all people with disability.
Recommendation 32
The committee recommends that the Australian Government ensure that the National
Disability Advocacy Program and other Commonwealth-funded disability advocacy
programs fund at least one autism-specific advocacy service in each state and territory.
Supported in principle
The Australian Government currently funds 59 organisations across Australia to deliver the
National Disability Advocacy Program (NDAP). The NDAP provides people with disability
with access to effective disability advocacy that promotes, protects and ensures their full and
equal enjoyment of all human rights enabling community participation. All people with
disability can receive support under the NDAP.
The Australian Government also funds 17 organisations through the Disability Representative
Organisations (DRO) program to provide systemic advocacy through representing people
with disability and providing advice to the Australian Government. The program helps to
address barriers to social and economic participation for people with disability, and ensures
their voices and perspectives are reflected in Australian Government systems, policies and
services. Autism Aspergers Advocacy Australia (A4) is funded through the DRO program
as part of the Disability Australia Consortium to provide autism-specific systemic advocacy.
Recommendation 33
The committee recommends that state and territory governments commit to funding
autism-specific advocacy services under their funded disability advocacy programs.
Progress toward implementation could be monitored through the National Federation
Reform Council.
Supported in principle
This recommendation is principally a matter for state and territory governments.
The Australian Government is currently working with state and territory governments to
collectively address service standards, determine demand and unmet demand, and improve
access to high quality advocacy services.
23
Recommendation 34
The committee recommends that the Australian Government, through the Department of
Social Services' Information Linkages and Capacity Building program, fund autism-specific
advocacy groups to build the capacity of general disability advocacy organisations to support
autistic people.
Supported in principle
The Department of Social Services (the department) is working to strengthen the current
Information, Linkages and Capacity Building (ILC) Strategy by responding to stakeholder
feedback received to date. This is includes, but is not limited to, making grant rounds more
targeted to address the needs of priority cohorts that may not have their needs addressed by
current ILC activities. The department understands the importance of building capacity
of advocacy organisations to support autistic people, and will consider this recommendation
when developing future grant activities and the broader ILC Strategy.
Recommendation 35
The committee recommends that the Australian Government, through the
Department of Social Services' Information Linkages and Capacity Building
program, fund autism-specific advocacy groups to build the self-advocacy and self-
determination skills of autistic people (and their families), including through peer
support programs.
Partially supported
The aim of the Information Linkages and Capacity Building (ILC) program is to provide
funding for activities which build the skills and confidence of all people with disability,
including autistic people, to participate and contribute to their community and protect their
rights.
The Australian Government acknowledges the importance of self-advocacy and
self-determination for people with disability so they can develop autonomy over their lives,
can make their own life choices and speak up for their needs. Advocacy groups play
a significant role in this regard. This recommendation is only partially supported as the ILC
program predominately provides funding to organisations through one off grants, awarded
through competitive rounds, to deliver projects in the community that benefit all Australians
with disability.
Grant rounds are administered according to the Commonwealth Grant Rules and Guidelines
(CGRGs), made under the Public Governance, Performance and Accountability Act 2013.
The probity principles of the CGRGs require all applicants to be treated in an open, fair and
transparent manner. In keeping with this framework, all applications are to be received and
processed in accordance with the relevant published Grant Opportunity Guidelines.
All eligible organisations, including autism-specific advocacy groups, are able to apply for
any available grant round.
The ILC program complements but does not diminish governments’ responsibilities under
Australia’s Disability Strategy which recognises responsibility for supporting advocacy
is substantially shared across all levels of government. The state and territory governments
retain their responsibility to fund self-advocacy and self-determination activities,
including autism specific activities, and the ILC program should not be viewed in isolation
from the broader system of funding supports affirmed under Australia’s Disability Strategy.
24
Recommendation 36
The committee recommends that the Department of Education, Skills and Employment
work with state and territory education authorities, the Australian Curriculum, Assessment
and Reporting Authority, Education Services Australia and other relevant stakeholders to
provide guidance and resources to help schools teach self-advocacy skills. While
applicable to all school children, there should be a particular focus on making this content
accessible to students with autism.
Supported in principle
The 2020 Review of the Disability Standards for Education 2005 (the Standards) made
recommendations to develop guidance and resources for students and their parents and carers
on their rights under the Disability Discrimination Act 1992 (DDA) and the Standards.
The Department of Education has commissioned Children and Young People with Disability
Australia (CYDA) to lead a co-design process to develop the resources which are expected
to be available from the second half of 2022. The resources will provide practical guidance
in an easy-to-understand format for students with disability, including autistic students,
and their parents and carers. The resources will help students, and parents and carers,
to self-advocate through key milestone and transition periods, including practical workbooks
for advocating and creating an action plan to work with their education provider.
The Department of Education will promote the resources through the education sector and
disability stakeholder networks, including to state and territory education departments and
non-government school representatives will be formally provided the resources and invited
to consider their use in their jurisdictions.
Recommendation 37
The committee recommends, as part of the inquiry into the National Disability Insurance
Scheme proposed in Recommendation 6, that consideration be given to whether the
National Disability Insurance Scheme could play a greater role in supporting the
development of self-advocacy skills (as part of a participant's Capacity Building budget).
Supported in principle
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in principle, and looks forward
to working with the Joint Standing Committee.
The NDIS supports NDIS participants to develop their capacity in ways that help them pursue
their goals. This may include supporting them to understand their rights or how to speak up
for themselves.
25
Diagnostic services
Recommendation 38
The committee recommends that, as a matter of priority, the National Autism
Strategy identify actions to improve access to autism diagnosis. This
should include:
 establishing, and publicly reporting on progress against, an agreed target
for a maximum waiting time for diagnosis that reflects best practice;
 improving information for families and adults about autism and the
pathways to diagnosis;
 identifying opportunities to co-locate autism screening and assessment
services within existing services, such as maternal health clinics, early
childhood and child care services, and school education settings;
 a national rollout of the Olga Tennison Autism Research Centre’s training
program for maternal and child health nurses to improve early
identification of autism;
 identifying opportunities for collaboration between maternal health care
nurses and early childhood educators to support identification of, and
communication about, autism in early childhood and child care settings;
 promoting use of the ASDetect app by parents, health practitioners and
educators
 developing diagnostic tools that are more sensitive to the heterogenic
presentation of autism, particularly in women and girls;
 working with medical colleges and professional bodies to improve the
supply of healthcare professionals with expertise in autism diagnosis;
 embedding autism within initial education courses for healthcare
professionals and educators, including training in the heterogenic
presentation of autism;
 promoting use of the Autism HealthPathways platform to aid clinical
decision-making in relation to autism assessments; and
 identifying ways to improve access to diagnostic services for people in
regional and remote areas, including telehealth options.
Supported in Principle
The Australian Government supports in principle this recommendation and acknowledges the
importance of access to information about autism, including diagnosis.
The Australian Government is already supporting implementation of the National Guideline
for the Assessment and Diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorders in Australia (the Guideline),
to create greater consistency in diagnostic practices across Australia and facilitate access to
targeted supports and services. The Guideline intends to standardise and provide for rigorous
and accurate diagnostic outcomes for autistic children and adults across a range of healthcare
settings and professions in Australia.
26
To support greater take-up of the best practice approaches to assessment and diagnosis
outlined in the Guideline, the Department of Social Services (the department) has established
an Expert Reference Group (ERG) comprising membership from health professional
associations and consumer groups. The department has also funded associated activities to
support greater take-up, including:
 Funding provided to the Autism Cooperative Research Centre (Autism CRC),
the Guideline developers, to develop the National Implementation Toolkit – a set
of resources to promote the Guideline to health professionals and autistic people and
their families and carers.
 Funding provided to the Autism CRC to support establishment and operationalisation
of the ERG.
 Funding provided to Australian Healthcare Associates to conduct an independent
evaluation of the reach and take-up of the Guideline.
 Funding provided to the Autism CRC through the Information, Linkages and Capacity
Building (ILC) program for the National Best-Practice Assessment and Diagnosis
project to develop resources to support mainstream health providers involved in the
assessment and diagnosis of autism. This project builds on the Autism CRC’s
National Implementation Toolkit.
The ILC program has also provided one-off grant funding to Amaze Incorporated for
Autism Connect – a national information service for autistic people, their families and carers,
health professionals, researchers, teachers, employers and the broader community.
The Australian Government has committed to the development of a National Roadmap
for Improving Health Services for Autistic People (Recommendations 61 and 62 refer).
Some aspects of this recommendation will be considered in the development of a roadmap.
Noting this, a number of other aspects of this recommendation would be the responsibility
of state and territory governments.
A key component of the Department of Health and Aged Care’s National Roadmap for
Improving the Health of People with Intellectual Disability is to support health care
professionals to provide better care for people with intellectual disability. In addition
to people with a diagnosed or suspected intellectual disability, the National Roadmap also
includes people with autism who also have an intellectual disability. There is potential
to build on or adapt this work to inform the development of a National Roadmap for
Improving Health Services for Autistic People.
The Department of Health and Aged Care is also working with the Department of Social
Services on implementing action 1.2 under the Early Childhood Targeted Action Plan
(EC TAP), under Australia’s Disability Strategy.
 Objective 1 in the EC TAP: Enable early identification of disability or developmental
concerns and develop clearer pathways and timely access to appropriate supports.
 Action 1.2 in the EC TAP: Provide support to facilitate, through Primary Health
Networks and Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Services, improved access
to primary health care services to better enable early detection of disability
or developmental concerns in young children, and appropriate referral pathways,
recognising the needs for priority population groups.
 EC TAP action 1.2 is due to be completed by 30 June 2024.
27
On 1 January 2022 permanent telehealth arrangements were introduced to the
Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) with the introduction of a single, national telehealth
program. These ongoing arrangements support the delivery of telehealth services for a range
of face-to-face services provided by General Practitioners, medical specialists, mental health
practitioners and allied health professionals. Medicare eligible patients with suspected or
diagnosed autism spectrum disorder are able to access to a wide range of telehealth MBS
services, providing a substitute for current face-to-face services where clinically appropriate.
Recommendation 39
The committee recommends that state and territory governments review their child health
and development screening programs to identify opportunities to improve early
identification of autism.
Noted
This is a recommendation for state and territory government consideration.
Recommendation 40
The committee recommends that the Australian Government task the Medicare Benefits
Schedule (MBS) Review Advisory Committee with an immediate review of MBS items
related to diagnosis of autism. The aim of the review should be to align current MBS items
with the diagnostic process established in the National Guideline for the Assessment and
Diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder in Australia, as well as recommend new items
required for the same purpose.
Supported in principle
The MBS Review Advisory Committee (MRAC) supports Australian Government priorities
by undertaking reviews, including as directed by the Minister for Health and Aged Care.
The scope and aim of reviews is in accordance with MRAC Terms of Reference.
MRAC is an independent body, whose outcomes, including recommendations for new items,
are dependent upon assessment against the committee framework, which includes findings
from consideration of existing models of care against an assessment framework.
Recommendation 41
The committee recommends that the Department of Health prioritise
implementation of the remaining recommendations of the Medicare Benefits
Schedule Review Taskforce (the Taskforce) in relation to the diagnosis of autism,
complex allied health assessments and multidisciplinary planning (as set out in the
Taskforce's June 2020 Report on Primary Care).
Supported
In December 2021 the Australian Government announced changes to the MBS in response to
recommendations from the MBS Review Taskforce. These changes relate to diagnosis and
treatment of Autism Spectrum Disorder, Complex Neurodevelopmental Disorders and
eligible disabilities. The changes will take effect on 1 March 2023.
28
Recommendation 42
The committee recommends the removal of the current age limit on Medicare Benefits
Schedule items related to the diagnosis of autism.
Not supported
This recommendation is not supported. The Department of Health and Aged Care is currently
implementing MBS changes in response to recommendations from the MBS Taskforce.
These include increasing the eligibility age limits across MBS services for assessment,
diagnosis and treatment of Autism Spectrum Disorder, Complex Neurodevelopmental
Disorders, and eligible disabilities from under 13 to under 25 years of age. The changes will
take effect on 1 March 2023.
Any further changes to the age limits should be considered as part of the associated
Post Implementation Review, which is expected to occur within 24 months of date of effect,
by 1 March 2025.
Early intervention approaches
Recommendation 43
The committee recommends that the Australian Government commit funding to
quality research to continue addressing gaps in the evidence for early intervention
approaches.
Supported
The Australian Government supports research and best practice early intervention.
Early intervention can be for both children and adults, and can help reduce the functional
impairments of disability.
Early childhood intervention in relation to children, is about giving them the best possible
start to life. The Early Childhood Targeted Action Plan was released in December 2021 under
Australia’s Disability Strategy. It contains a number of Commonwealth led actions,
including the commissioning of work to review and update guidance for best practice in early
childhood intervention as well as conducting a service system gap analysis. These actions are
expected to commence by late-2022 and be completed by December 2023.
The Australian Government is funding quality research to grow the evidence base for early
intervention approaches. In 2020, the NDIA engaged the Autism Cooperative Research
Centre to undertake an independent review of the best available evidence for supporting
children on the autism spectrum. The review investigated non-pharmacologic interventions
and was inconclusive on the type and frequency of interventions required to achieve optimal
outcomes.
The NDIA is also leading a comprehensive systematic review and meta-analysis
of behavioural interventions informed by or based on Applied Behavioural Analysis
in autistic children seven years or younger. The review is examining what benefits can
be expected from the main types of behavioural interventions, in relation to key NDIS
outcomes, and what individual characteristics or intervention design/delivery factors may
contribute to better gains. The review will also examine whether there is a relationship
between outcomes, positive or negative, and different intervention intensities.
29
Recommendation 44
The committee recommends that the Australian Government investigate options to
improve post-diagnosis support, including a one-stop shop for directing individuals
to the most appropriate support services.
The one-stop shop should be accessible via a range of platforms, including more
traditional mediums such as print and phone support services.
Supported in principle
The Australian Government recognises the importance of early intervention, including for
young children. Recognising this, the Early Childhood Targeted Action Plan under
Australia’s Disability Strategy, sets out key actions to strengthen early identification,
information, support and pathways, as well as collaboration between programs and services.
Actions are being implemented with an intersectional and diversity lens. Actions include
Australian Government, and state and territory led-actions.
On 2 August 2022, the Australian Government announced grants of $16 million under the
National Early Childhood Program (NECP). In addition to the funding under the NECP,
funding of up to $15 million over four years to 2025-26 will be offered for outreach for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children (‘Outreach’ initiative), under the Information,
Linkages and Capacity Building program, which will complement the NECP.
These activities will support young children aged 0-8 years with newly identified disability or
emerging developmental concerns outside of the NDIS, and build the capacity of their
families and carers to support their child’s development with 50 per cent of all activities
under the NECP targeting children with autism or autism-like characteristics. The NECP was
informed by a co-design consultation process with around 600 stakeholders and aligns with
Australia’s Disability Strategy. The Department of Social Services will undertake further
consultation with key stakeholders to inform the design of the ‘Outreach’ initiative in the
second half of 2022.
The NECP builds on a range of supports and services the Australian Government has
provided through programs such as the Helping Children with Autism (HCWA) program.
Some elements of the HCWA program will cease on 31 December 2022 when supports under
the NECP are expected to commence, such as autism-specific parent workshops, covering
both the early and school years, and autism-specific playgroups for children. The HCWA
program has also funded disability specific information on the Raising Children Network
website.
The Disability Gateway offers links to autism-related information, supports and services
funded by Commonwealth, state and local governments in each state and territory, including:
 Autism Connect – a free national autism helpline, providing information to support
autistic people, their families and carers, health professionals, researchers, teachers,
employers and the broader community; and
 Launchpad - a resource developed by Autism Spectrum Australia to help young
autistic people and their families to live independently.
Funding has been allocated to ensure the Disability Gateway website content continues
to be accessible, current and is expanded on in the future. This includes providing
information on more autism-related services and supports, developed by Autism Spectrum
Australia and other autism-related sector organisations and through user feedback and usage.
30
Recommendation 45
The committee recommends that all National Disability Insurance Scheme planners
and educators associated with the new Early Childhood Approach undergo training
in understanding autism and best evidence-based approaches to intervention.
Supported
The NDIA’s early childhood approach supports best practice in early childhood intervention
because it helps each child and family to build their capacity, and supports greater inclusion
in community and every day settings, with the child’s parents, carers, family members and
educators playing an important role.
Many NDIA Early Childhood Partners (EC Partners) who support participants in their local
community understand the NDIS, create and implement a plan, and assist participants
to understand how the NDIS works with other service systems, are leading practitioners in
the field.
The NDIA has developed training for EC Partners to engage and support participants and
families and carers confidently and meaningfully.
The NDIA’s Early Childhood approach is based on best practice, international standards
of family centred practices, with the child’s parents, carers, family members and educators
playing an important role.
As part of the NDIA’s commitment to uplifting planner capability as set out in the
NDIA Corporate Plan, additional work is being undertaken to ensure staff have the right
capabilities through the continuous design and delivery of mandatory eLearning training and
induction programs.
The NDIA has also developed a Disability Navigator and disability snapshots to help NDIA
staff and partners improve their awareness and understanding of the lived experience
of people with disabilities, including autistic people.
The NDIA’s decision making is guided by evidence-based approaches and will continue
to incorporate research findings into training for EC Partners as these become available.
31
Education
Recommendation 46
The committee supports implementation of the recommendations of the 2020
Review of the Disability Standards for Education 2005 and recommends that the
Department of Education, Skills and Employment and state and territory education
authorities:
 work with the taskforce established to develop the National Autism
Strategy to apply an 'autism lens' to the implementation of the Disability
Standards for Education review recommendations; and
 include specific actions to ensure the Disability Standards for Education
meet the needs of autistic students.
Supported in principle
The Department of Education is working with state and territory governments and education
authorities to implement the recommendations of the 2020 Review of the
Disability Standards for Education 2005 (the Review). The Review was conducted with
extensive community consultation, including stakeholders supporting autistic students and
people living with autism. The recommendations are being implemented in a consultative
manner, and inclusive of the needs of autistic students.
Once the forum to drive development of a National Autism Strategy is determined
(Recommendation 2 refers), the Department of Education will include the forum in its
consultative process for implementation of the Review recommendations.
All schools in Australia are required under the Disability Discrimination Act 1992 and the
Disability Standards for Education 2005 (the Standards) to provide reasonable adjustments
for students with disability, including autism, so they can access and participate in education
on the same basis as students without disability. While the Australian Government plays
a leadership role in education and provides substantial funding for schools, state and territory
governments are responsible for the regulation, administration and operation of schools.
Further information about the Review is available on the Department of Education website at:
Final Report – 2020 Review of the Disability Standards for Education 2005.
Recommendation 47
The committee recommends that the Australian Government coordinate with all
government and non-government education authorities to ensure that policies on bullying
include specific measures to address bullying of autistic students, including the use of:
 frameworks for positive behaviour interventions and support; and
 opportunities for supported social engagement.
Supported in principle
State and territory education authorities have constitutional responsibility for the delivery and
regulation of schooling to all children of school age in their jurisdictions, including policies
on bullying and support for autistic students.
32
Once the forum to drive development of a National Autism Strategy is chosen
(Recommendation 2 refers), the Department of Education will consult with the forum on
specific measures, frameworks, policies and approaches, and the success of these measures
to address bullying of autistic students.
The Australian Government takes a leadership role in setting and advocating for national
priorities for school education and also supports national programs and resources that
schools, students, and families can use to address bullying issues and make school
environments safe and inclusive to support the wellbeing of all young people,
including neurodiverse students.
The Australian Government works collaboratively with states and territories on numerous
wellbeing measures. While many of these measures are not explicitly focused on autistic
students, they are aimed at supporting all students. There may be opportunities to build upon
the work already undertaken as part of these initiatives to provide targeted support for autistic
students. Some key measures addressing bullying and supporting the wellbeing of students
and school communities are outlined below:
 The Positive Partnerships program provides professional development for teachers,
principals and other school staff to build their understanding, skills and expertise
in working with autistic school-age students. It provides workshops, information
sessions, and other online resources for parents and carers of autistic school-age
students.
 The Australian Student Wellbeing Framework supports school communities to build,
maintain and enhance positive and inclusive learning environments.
 The Student Wellbeing Hub provides a range of information and resources for
educators, students and parents to assist them to create and maintain a safe and
supportive school environment. The Hub has specific resources on: bullying and how
students can be empowered to take action against it; and to assist educators to support
autistic students to develop positive relationships and express their feelings.
 The Bullying. No Way! website supports school communities with evidence-informed
resources and activities for a proactive approach to bullying education and prevention.
 The National Day of Action against Bullying and Violence, held on the third
Friday of March each year, is an opportunity for Australian schools to build and
highlight their everyday work to counter bullying and violence.
 The nationally agreed Foundation to Year 10 Australian Curriculum (curriculum)
endorsed by all education ministers, sets the expectations for what all Australian
students should be taught, regardless of their background or where they live.
The curriculum also addresses cyber safety. State and territory curriculum authorities
and school authorities are responsible for the implementation of the
curriculum in their schools, and are able to adopt and adapt the curriculum to meet
student and community needs.
 The Australian Government has appointed an eSafety Commissioner.
The eSafety Commissioner’s website provides information about cyberbullying and
fact sheets on how people can assist themselves and others who may be cyberbullied.
The eSafety Commissioner also investigates complaints about cyberbullying and can
assist in having content removed from social media sites.
33
 The National School Chaplaincy Program (NSCP) chaplains work in collaboration
with around 3,000 school communities per year to support the wellbeing of school
students through the provision of pastoral care, running programs such
as breakfast clubs and coordinating volunteer activities within the school community.
 The Department of Education works in partnership with the eSafety Commissioner
to deliver an online cyberbullying professional learning package for NSCP chaplains.
Recommendation 48
The committee recommends that the Education Ministers Meeting develop and
implement a framework for regularly monitoring and publicly reporting on
education outcomes for students with disability from 2023. This should include
monitoring and reporting on outcomes for autistic students as a separate cohort and
should be informed by consultation with the taskforce established to develop the
National Autism Strategy.
Supported in principle
Collecting and reporting student outcomes data is a matter for state and territory
governments. Once the forum to drive development of a National Autism Strategy
is chosen (Recommendation 2 refers), the Department of Education will consult with
the forum on improving monitoring and reporting on outcomes for autistic students
as a separate cohort.
The Australian Government has a strong transparency agenda in education and
is working to improve public accountability and reporting on student outcomes
through national policies and frameworks including:
 Reporting commitments in the Alice Springs (Mparntwe) Education Declaration.
 Incorporating outcomes for students with disability into broader work on national
performance reporting as part of the Measurement Framework for Schooling
in Australia.
 Australia’s Disability Strategy which commits governments to collecting and sharing
relevant data to support effective monitoring and reporting of outcomes for people
with disability in order to drive change.
 Implementing the recommendation of the 2020 Review of the Disability Standards for
Education 2005 for states and territories to develop nationally consistent principles
and practices on collection and public reporting of data on school students with
disability.
34
Recommendation 49
The committee supports the 2019 recommendation of the National School
Resourcing Board in relation to refining the costing model for the students with
disability loading to inform the loading settings from 2023. Accordingly, the
committee recommends that implementation of the new costing model be
accompanied by stronger accountability measures requiring government and non-
government education authorities to demonstrate that schools are receiving
adequate funds to meet the needs of students with disability— including autistic
students.
Noted
The 2019 National School Resourcing Board (the Board) review of the loading for students
with disability made eight recommendations. On 2 July 2020, the Australian Government
released its response to the Board’s review, agreeing to the Board’s recommendation
in relation to refining the costing model for the students with disability loading to inform the
loading settings from 2023. In 2021, the Department of Education commissioned an
independent review of the Students with Disability Loading.
This work is being progressed in consultation with the schooling sector. Findings and
recommendations of this independent review will be provided to the Australian Government
for consideration.
Recommendation 50
The committee recommends that, where state and territory education authorities use
targeted programs to distribute funding for students with disability, eligibility for these
programs be reviewed and adjusted to better meet the needs of autistic students.
Noted
This is a matter for state and territory government consideration.
Recommendation 51
The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with state and territory
education authorities and relevant stakeholders to identify and implement measures to
build the capacity of teachers, school leaders and parents to support the inclusion of autistic
students in schools. This should include the provision of additional specialist support in
schools.
Supported in principle
The 2020 Review of the Disability Standards for Education 2005 (the Standards) made
recommendations to strengthen the knowledge and capability of educators and education
providers to meet their obligations under the Standards, and to better embed accountability
for the Standards throughout the education system.
Recommendations from the Review build on the capacity of teachers, school leaders and
parents to support all students with disability, including autistic students.
Implementation of the recommendations is being guided by the Disability Standards Review
Implementation Reference Group (IRG). The IRG comprises representatives from state and
territory education departments and representatives of the non-government schools sector
(Independent Schools Australia and the National Catholic Education Commission).
35
The Department of Education is also working with Education Services Australia to expand
the autism-specific resources already available on the Student Wellbeing Hub and on the web
portal for the Nationally Consistent Collection of Data on School Students with Disability.
New resources under development include:
 Online advice and strategies to help students self-regulate when they are feeling
stressed or overwhelmed by their environment, including school.
 Resources to promote a constructive dialogue by teachers and families about
supporting autistic children transitioning into school.
The Positive Partnerships program has helped improve inclusion of autistic students
in schools since it was established in 2008 as part of the Australian Government’s
cross-sectoral Helping Children with Autism initiative. The Positive Partnerships program,
administered by the Department of Education, supports school-aged autistic students.
The program is implemented in each state and territory by a planning group comprising
representatives of government, Catholic and independent education authorities,
autism associations and allied health professionals. The program provides:
 Professional development for teachers, principals and other school staff to build their
understanding, skills and expertise in working with school-age autistic students;
 Workshops and information sessions for parents and carers of school-age autistic
students; and
 A website providing online learning modules and other resources in different
languages, for parents and carers from culturally and linguistically diverse
backgrounds, and resources developed in consultation with
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities.
More than 26,000 people participated in face-to-face workshops, online webinars and training
in 2021, comprising educators and support staff and parents and family members.
The Positive Partnership website has received more than 1 million visits since 2012.
Recommendation 52
The committee recommends that the Australian Institute of Teaching and School
Leadership work with state and territory teacher regulatory authorities to:
 ensure all initial teacher education courses include at least two units on
inclusive education, with a focus on the functional challenges experienced
by autistic students, as well as evidence-based strategies for supporting
autistic students in classrooms; and
 incorporate autism understanding into professional development
requirements tied to teacher registration.
Supported in principle
Initial teacher education programs are required to meet the Accreditation of Initial Teacher
Education Programs in Australia: Standards and Procedures (the Accreditation Standards)
which set high level requirements to ensure that all initial teacher education graduates meet
the Graduate career stage of the Australian Professional Standards for Teachers
(the Teacher Standards). State and territory teacher regulatory authorities are responsible for
the accreditation of initial teacher education programs using the Accreditation Standards.
36
Within this national framework, program content is the responsibility of each higher
education provider.
Amendment of the Accreditation Standards requires the agreement of all
Australian education ministers through the Education Ministers Meeting.
The Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership works with state and territory
regulatory authorities to implement any changes once agreed by education ministers.
The Australian Government supports the provision of quality professional development for
teachers. High quality professional learning for teachers is primarily a state and territory
responsibility involving teacher regulatory authorities, government and non-government
education departments, schools and their teaching staff. The professional development
requirements tied to teacher registration are a matter for state and territory teacher regulatory
bodies.
The Next Steps: Report of the Quality Initial Teacher Education Review (QITE Review),
released on 24 February 2022, recommended the Accreditation Standards be amended
to ensure initial teacher education graduates are taught sufficient evidence-based practices
to meet the Teacher Standards and empower them with the tools to lead a classroom,
including in relation to supporting diverse learners and students with disability
(Recommendation 7 of the QITE Review refers). The report also delivered a finding for
higher education providers to explore the potential for micro-credentials and short courses
to provide quality access to opportunities to enhance teacher capability in areas where
teachers feel they need additional support, including teaching diverse learners
(Finding 7 of the QITE Review refers). The Australian Government is continuing to consider
its response to the recommendations of the QITE Review.
Recommendation 53
The committee recommends that the Australian Institute of Teaching and School
Leadership work with relevant stakeholders create additional autism- related
Illustrations of Practice—across all domains of teaching and for all career stages—
to help teachers better support autistic students in classrooms and schools.
Supported in principle
In support of the recommendations of the 2020 Review of the Disability Standards for
Education 2005 (the Standards), the then Minister for Education commissioned the
Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership (AITSL) to undertake mapping and
analysis of relevant national schooling standards and frameworks to determine the extent
these support the achievement of the objectives of the Standards.
The Australian Government has subsequently engaged AITSL to undertake work
stemming from that mapping and analysis which is relevant for this recommendation.
This work includes:
 Elaborations of the Teacher Standards to provide further clarity about the
Disability Standards, and their implementation in schools and to inform any future
changes to the Standards.
 Leadership guides to set out explicit roles, responsibilities and accountability for
school leaders with respect to inclusive education and adherence to the
Disability Standards.
37
 Expanding the range of ‘In the Classroom’ videos available for teachers and school
leaders to include examples focused on determining reasonable adjustments for
students with disability.
In support of the recommendations of the Review of the Standards,
the Australian Government has engaged Education Services Australia to develop a suite
of case studies (leveraging the existing case studies relating to the Nationally Consistent
Collection of Data (NCCD)) to provide practical examples for teachers and school leaders
to support them in understanding and discharging their obligations under the Standards.
There are already nine autism specific illustrations of practice on the NCCD portal.
The Positive Partnerships program to support school-aged autistic students has developed
a range of face-to-face and online autism-specific short courses to help teachers better
support autistic students in classrooms and schools, including:
 Introduction to Autism
 Introduction to Visual Supports
 Introduction to the Planning Tool
 Introduction to Positive Behaviour Support
 Understanding Sensory Processing
 Supporting Successful Transitions and Change
There is also a specific module for teachers and teacher assistants. These courses can be used
across all domains of teaching and for all career stages. More than 21,000 autism-specific
modules were completed in 2021, mainly by teachers and support staff.
Recommendation 54
The committee recommends that the Department of Education, Skills and Employment
works with state and territory governments and the non- government school sector to
develop clear guidance on the schooling options available for autistic students so that
parents and carers can make more informed choices. This should include information
about the role of—and interaction between—mainstream, special schools, autism-specific
schools and home-schooling options within the education ecosystem.
Supported in principle
The Australian Government supports the rights of children and young people with disability
to have the same educational opportunities as other school students.
While the Australian Government provides substantial funding for government and
non-government schools, and works collaboratively with states and territories in developing
national priorities for education, it does not have a direct role in the administration
or operation of schools.
Under Australian constitutional arrangements, responsibility for the delivery of school
education, including decisions on schooling options for autistic students, rests with the
individual education authorities in each state and territory.
As part of the implementation of the recommendations of the 2020 Review of the
Disability Standards for Education 2005, new information products are being produced
to inform children and young people with disability and their families of their rights.
38
These materials will include guidance for families on how to advocate for their children
in school settings to ensure that they receive the support they need from their chosen school.
Recommendation 55
The committee recommends that the Australian Government coordinate the
National Disability Insurance Agency, the Department of Education, Skills and
Employment, and state and territory education authorities to:
 resolve, as a matter of urgency, any outstanding issues in relationship to
the intersection of school funding and the NDIS; and
 develop clear guidance in relation to the intersection of school funding
and the NDIS, including in relation to the provision of NDIS supports
within schools.
Supported
The Australian Government supports the rights of children and young people with disability
to have the same educational opportunities as other school students.
The Australian Government believes that we should strive for a high-quality school system
that assists all Australian children to reach their full potential. There are support programs
in place to help ensure students with disability have the same educational opportunities
as other school students so they can fully participate in the economic and social life of the
community.
The Disability Standards for Education 2005 (the Standards) specify how education and
training is to be made accessible to students with disability. The Standards articulate the
obligations of education providers with respect to that access, including the requirement for
making any reasonable educational adjustments required to ensure a child with disability can
enrol and participate in education on the same basis as their peers – these obligations apply to
all public and private schools in Australia. The Australian Government provides financial
support for these educational adjustments via the Students with Disability Loading,
a component of Commonwealth recurrent funding for schools.
The NDIS can fund additional support that a child requires at school due to the impact
of their disability on functional capacity. These supports are not primarily related
to education and learning and are beyond what a school is responsible for. For example,
the NDIS can fund specialist support and training for school staff related to the specific
personal support needs of a student with disability, including specialised behaviour
intervention and support.
The Australian Government is committed to continuing to work with state and territory
governments to ensure the allocation of responsibilities and funding between the NDIS and
schools is clear, well understood and working in concert with one another.
39
Recommendation 56
The committee recommends that the Equity in Higher Education Panel include a
specific focus on the needs of autistic students as part of its work to develop a
Student Equity in Higher Education Roadmap. This should include consultation with
the taskforce established to develop the National Autism Strategy, as well as a
focus on:
 increasing autism understanding among all teaching and administrative
staff;
 creating autism-friendly information for current and prospective students;
 creating autism-friendly campus environments and services; and
 widespread adoption of autism inclusion and peer mentoring programs.
Supported in principle
The Department of Education notes the findings of the committee’s report regarding
significant disparities in outcomes for autistic students. The Equity in Higher Education Panel
(EHEP) will consider the needs of autistic students as part of their ongoing work
on a national student equity in higher education strategy, which aims to improve the
outcomes and opportunities for people experiencing disadvantage, including students with
disability.
The EHEP Secretariat will engage with the forum chosen to drive development
of a National Autism Strategy (Recommendation 2 refers) to identify suitable opportunities
for consultation.
Recommendation 57
The committee recommends that a Transition to Work Roadmap be developed
under the auspices of the National Autism Strategy and as part of the National
Autism Employment Framework proposed at Recommendation 58. This should
provide a nationally agreed and coordinated approach to transition planning across
school and higher education settings and should identify actions to:
 improve students' social and employability skills;
 embed the use of evidence-based transition planning resources, such as
Better Outcomes and Successful Transitions for Autism (BOOST-A) and
the MyWAY Employability web platform in schools and work
preparation programs (including the NDIS School Leaver Employment
Supports);
 improve the autism understanding of NDIS School Leaver Employment
Supports providers;
 expand the reach of the Ticket to Work program; and
 establish stronger links between schools, universities and employers to
facilitate autism-aware work experience opportunities.
40
Supported in principle
In December 2021, the Australian Government released Employ My Ability –
the Disability Employment Strategy as a ten year commitment to improving employment
outcomes for people with disability.
Through priority area two of Employ My Ability, the Australian Government recognises that
more needs to be done to build the employment skills, experience and confidence of young
people with disability, including young autistic people, as they transition to work.
Under Employ My Ability, the Australian Government has already committed to:
 Develop new approaches to support young people with disability in their transition
from school to work, and
 Develop and promote information, tools and resources relating to employment
pathways to build the capacity and confidence of young people with
disability, as well as their support networks.
The NDIA is implementing the NDIS Participant Employment Strategy revised Action Plan
for 2021-22, which aims to see 30 per cent of working age participants in employment
by June 2023. The strategy maintains a shared focus of increasing employment opportunities
and outcomes for participants, facilitating the transition from education to employment,
and strengthening the autonomy and self-determination of people with a disability to pursue
and achieve their employment goals.
The NDIA continues to focus on employment supports for young participants,
particularly as they leave school. A review of the employment support available for young
participants commenced in Quarter 3 of 2022, to address the identified shortcomings
of school leaver employment supports, such as: delivery of a set program of interventions;
variable performance of providers; a payment system unrelated to provider effort,
and participant uncertainty about selecting an effective provider.
Employment
Recommendation 58
The committee recommends that a National Autism Employment Framework be
agreed under the auspices of the National Autism Strategy. The framework should
identify actions to:
 promote the benefits of hiring autistic people to governments and
business;
 further establish governments as employers of choice;
 incentivise private sector employment;
 encourage the expansion of both ICT and non-ICT autism-focused
employment programs;
 support self-employment options for autistic people;
 improve information for autistic job seekers about available supports and
DES providers with autism experience; and
 improve autism-related education, training and resources for DES
providers and employers (building on existing resources where available).
41
The framework should also be compatible with the Employ My Ability strategy and should
help inform the new Disability Employment Support (DES) Model being developed by the
Department of Social Services for implementation in 2023.
Supported in principle
In December 2021, the Australian Government released Employ My Ability –
the Disability Employment Strategy as a ten year commitment to improving employment
outcomes for people with disability, including autistic people.
Through Employ My Ability’s priority areas, the Australian Government recognises that
more needs to be done to support employers to hire and retain employees with disability,
as well as to improve the supports and services available to people with disability to ensure
they have choice and control over their careers.
The Australian Government is also considering how particular cohorts of people with
disability, including autistic people, can be better supported as part of the new disability
employment support model. The Disability Employment Services (DES) Reform Reference
Group provided its final recommendations to the Department of Social Services for
consideration in July 2022. The Intellectual Disability, Autism and Psychosocial Disability
Working Group informed these recommendations to ensure the needs of autistic people were
represented in the discussion and recommendations.
The Australian Public Service Commission (APSC) is supportive of this recommendation.
This will be considered as the APSC rolls out work in the disability employment space, and
diversity and inclusion initiatives more broadly. Some examples of activities that have been
delivered or that are underway include:
 The Australian Public Service (APS) Disability Employment Strategy 2020-2025
includes actions for agencies to improve attraction, recruitment and retention of
people with disability and improve disability awareness and confidence.
 An Affirmative measures cross-agency project is underway to uncover barriers or
opportunities to use the Affirmative measures employment provisions.
This includes improving understanding and consistent application of bulk recruitment
activities using the provision to enhance candidate and agency experience.
 Practical Guide around neurodiversity investigating potential guidance for attracting,
recruiting and retaining neurodivergent people.
 Guidance provided to agencies to establish Disability Contact Officers as a single
point of contact to provide advice and support to employees with disability and their
managers to assist with reasonable adjustments, career development and other issues
that may arise.
The APSC will consider autistic people throughout the development and delivery of these
projects.
The APSC recognises that further work is needed support the employment of people with
neuro-diverse conditions, including autism, if the APS is to be considered an employer
of choice.
42
Recommendation 59
The committee recommends that the Department of Social Services ensure that all
monitoring and evaluation activities related to the Employ My Ability strategy and
the new Disability Employment Support Model allow for disaggregation by
disability type, including autism.
Supported in principle
Monitoring and evaluation activities for Employ My Ability will occur through the reporting
mechanisms for Australia’s Disability Strategy including the Strategy’s Outcomes
Framework.
The Department of Social Services (the department) is responsible for the implementation of
the Strategy’s Outcomes Framework, which will measure, track and report on outcomes for
people with disability over the next 10 years. Reporting under the Outcomes Framework
focuses on seven Outcome Areas, including employment and financial security.
The collection and presentation of outcome measures will involve various disaggregation,
including gender and age as well as disability type, where possible. The ability
to disaggregate data depends on the data collections from which the measures are drawn.
The department is committed to improving the quality of data collected regarding people with
disability, and disability services, and supports this recommendation in principle, but is not
the final decision maker regarding many of the collections used in the Outcomes Framework.
Recommendation 60
The committee recommends that the Department of Social Services incorporate into
the design of the new Disability Employment Support Model:
 relevant elements of the National Autism Employment Framework; and
 lessons from autism-specific employment programs about what works in
relation to achieving long-term employment outcomes for autistic people.
Supported in principle
The Australian Government is committed to assisting more people with disability into jobs
so they can enjoy the social and economic benefits that work brings. People with disability
and employers need a system that meets their needs and provides the appropriate supports to
find and keep a job. The current Disability Employment Services (DES) program will be
replaced by the New Disability Employment Support Model.
This work is being done in collaboration with people with disability, disability
representatives, employers, provider representatives, academics and other experts on
disability and employment matters. This has included consultation with autistic people,
and those with autism experience and expertise.
43
Health and Mental Health
Recommendation 61
The committee recommends that the Department of Health work with the taskforce
established to develop the National Autism Strategy to develop a National
Roadmap for Improving Health Services for Autistic People, similar to the National
Roadmap for Improving Health Services for People with Intellectual Disability.
This roadmap should include, but not be limited to, actions that address:
 best practice models of care for autistic people, including mental health
care;
 the alignment of Medicare Benefit Schedule items with best practice
models of care for autistic people;
 reasonable adjustments for autistic people in health care settings;
 the availability and appropriateness of tools and resources to support
diagnosis of comorbidities (including mental health conditions) and the
provision of reasonable adjustments for autistic people in health care
settings;
 better connections between health care service sectors, including mental
health services, disability services and the National Disability Insurance
Scheme;
 the elimination of restrictive practices in health care settings; and
 improved autism education and training for health professionals.
Supported in principle
The Australian Government has committed to the development of a National Autism Strategy
and, as part of that, a National Roadmap to specifically target health and mental health
outcomes for autistic Australians.
The new Roadmap will need to consider the synergies with the existing
National Roadmap for Improving the Health of People with Intellectual Disability, including
in the following areas:
 Improved support for people with intellectual disability and their families and carers.
 Developing better models of health care for people with intellectual disability.
 Better use of existing Medicare Benefits Schedule items.
 Continuity of care, and better care coordination and integration within the health
system.
 Better coordination with other sectors.
 Better support for health care professionals to provide care for people with intellectual
disability.
The 2021-22 Budget provided $1 million over two years to continue to build the capacity
of the mental health workforce through education, training and health promotion to better
meet the mental health needs of people with developmental disability, including autism.
This work is expected to commence in mid-2022.
44
There is potential to build on this work to further improve autism education and training for
mental health professionals as part of the development of a National Roadmap for Improving
Health Services for Autistic People.
The Department of Social Services is leading work with states and territories through the
Australia’s Disability Strategy, Safety Targeted Action Plan (ADS Safety TAP) to make
better connections between mainstream service systems and the NDIS. Through better
connections, transitions and referrals across systems will be more efficient and effective,
ensuring that a person with disability at risk of harm has the necessary safeguards in place
to reduce the risk of harm.
The ADS Safety TAP also supports the commitment under the United Nations Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities to reduce and eliminate the use of restrictive practices
across government services systems. Each state and territory is responsible for implementing
strategies to achieve this within the service systems that they offer.
Recommendation 62
The committee recommends that the new National Roadmap for Improving Health
Services for Autistic People include an associated National Autism Mental Health
Plan aimed specifically at improving the treatment of autistic people with
co-occurring mental health conditions. This Plan should also align with the
National Mental Health and Suicide Plan.
Supported in principle
This recommendation will need to be considered in the development of a National Roadmap
for Improving Health Services for Autistic People. If a National Autism Mental Health Plan
is developed, it would need to align with the National Mental Health and Suicide Prevention
Agreement (National Agreement) released in March 2022. The National Agreement sets out
the shared intention of the Commonwealth, state and territory governments to work in
partnership to improve the mental health of all Australians and ensure the sustainability and
enhance the services of the Australian mental health and suicide prevention system.
Recommendation 63
The committee recommends the Australian Government work with state and
territory governments and relevant stakeholders to encourage hospitals and public
health care settings to adopt measures to improve the experience of autistic people
in their care. This may include measures such as providing guidance about
reasonable adjustments or employing autism liaison officers to facilitate health care
services for autistic people.
Supported in principle
A key component of the National Roadmap for Improving the Health of People with
Intellectual Disability (the National Roadmap) is working with stakeholders to improve the
way hospitals and public health care settings deliver healthcare to people with intellectual
disability. This action is included in section C of the National Roadmap – ‘Better support for
health care professionals to provide better care for people with intellectual disability’.
45
This action has the desired outcome that health care professionals have appropriate
knowledge, skills and attitudes to provide quality, appropriate and disability-informed health
care for people with intellectual disability.
There is potential to build on or adapt work done to address the above action
in a National Roadmap for Improving Health Services for Autistic People and
a National Autism Mental Health Plan.
Recommendation 64
The committee recommends that the health and wellbeing priority under the new
National Autism Research Framework include a focus on:
 routine analysis and reporting of population health data for autistic
people, including health status, health service utilisation, health
outcomes and mortality data;
 the risk factors, causes and presentation of comorbidities; and
 evaluation of health and mental health interventions for autistic people.
Supported in principle
If a National Autism Research Framework is supported by the Australian Government,
the Department of Health and Aged Care will provide input into the health and wellbeing
priority under the Framework, including a focus on evaluation of mental health interventions
for autistic people.
The Department of Health and Aged Care has allocated funding of $9.3 million over two
years to SANE Australia from July 2021 to deliver a pilot of specialised digital services for
people with complex mental health needs, including intellectual disability and autism.
The pilot is being independently evaluated. The evaluation will include consideration of the
pilot’s impact on mental health outcomes for people with intellectual disability and autistic
people.
Recommendation 65
The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with state and
territory governments and relevant stakeholders to develop and widely promote
clinical care pathways to help autistic people navigate the health care system,
including mental health services.
Supported in principle
This recommendation will need to be considered in the development of
a National Roadmap for Improving Health Services for Autistic People.
A key component of the National Roadmap for Improving the Health of People with
Intellectual Disability (the National Roadmap) is working with stakeholders to develop and
widely promote clinical care pathways to help people with intellectual disability navigate the
health care system. This action is included in section A of the National Roadmap -
‘Improved support for people with intellectual disability and their families and carers’.
This action has the desired outcome that people with intellectual disability are better
supported to navigate the health system and access appropriate health services.
46
There is potential to build on or adapt work done to address this recommendation in the
development of a National Roadmap for Improving Health Services for Autistic People.
Recommendation 66
The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with state and
territory governments and relevant stakeholders to implement specialised care
models targeted to meet the needs of autistic people, including mental health care
needs. These models should offer tiered services and supports that are available to
autistic people and their families throughout their health care journey, with a
particular focus on mental health services and on preventing individuals and
families from falling through the cracks between systems or reaching a crisis point.
Supported in principle
This recommendation will need to be considered in the development of
a National Roadmap for Improving Health Services for Autistic People.
A key component of the National Roadmap for Improving the Health of People with
Intellectual Disability (the National Roadmap) is working with stakeholders to implement
specialised care models targeted to meet the needs of people with intellectual disability.
This action is included in section B1 of the National Roadmap - ‘Developing better models of
health care’. This action has the desired outcome that better models of care are developed that
provide people with intellectual disability with quality health care that is person-centred,
trauma-informed, and enables reasonable adjustments.
There is potential to build on or adapt work done to address this recommendation in the
development of a National Roadmap for Improving Health Services for Autistic People.
Through the National Mental Health and Suicide Prevention Agreement
(National Agreement), all governments have committed to work together to consider and
support the mental health and wellbeing of a number of priority population groups,
including people with disability. There is an opportunity for the Australian Government
to work with state and territory governments under the National Agreement to ensure mental
health and suicide prevention services meet the needs of autistic people.
The 2021-22 Budget included $9.3 million over two years for SANE Australia to deliver
a pilot of specialised digital mental health services. The pilot aims to improve access
to mental health services to meet the needs of people for whom mainstream services may
be challenging, including those with co-occurring conditions such as intellectual disability
and autism.
The pilot has been co-designed with mental health, disability and autism experts including the
Council for Intellectual Disability and autism peak body Amaze Incorporated.
People with lived experience of mental health, disability and autism were also closely
involved in developing the pilot service delivery model. The pilot commenced in
November 2021 and will be independently evaluated, including with regard to its impact on
mental health outcomes for people with a disability.
47
Recommendation 67
The committee recommends that a national standard for information accessibility be
developed under the auspices of the National Autism Strategy. This standard should align
with existing accessibility standards but should also be tailored to meeting the needs of
autistic people.
Supported in principle
A national standard for information accessibility, aligning with existing accessibility
standards and tailored to meeting the needs of autistic people, will be considered in the
development of a National Autism Strategy.
Housing
Recommendation 68
The committee recommends, as part of the inquiry into the National Disability
Insurance Scheme proposed in Recommendation 6, that the effectiveness of funded
supports to enable autistic people to live independently be reviewed. This should
have particular reference to:
 the high proportion of autistic adults living in their family home;
 the impact (and appropriateness) of the informal care burden on parents
and carers; and
 the need for long-term accommodation planning to enable independent
living following the death of a participant’s parents or carers.
Supported in principle
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in principle, and looks forward
to working with the Joint Standing Committee.
The NDIA is developing an overarching home and living policy that will inform the way
NDIS participants are supported to pursue their home and living goals.
The aim of the policy will be to give participants more choice and control over where
they live, who they live with and the supports they use. This also includes supporting
participants to build the skills they need to live as independently as possible.
While co-design of the new home and living policy takes place, the NDIA is also progressing
a significant program of shorter term work in line with the policy intent to improve home and
living supports for participants. Further information about this is available at: Housing and
living supports and services.
48
Recommendation 69
The committee recommends that the National Disability Insurance Agency work
with relevant stakeholders to review the Specialist Disability Accommodation
Design Standard to ensure it accounts for the sensory issues experienced by autistic
participants.
Supported
Following extensive feedback from the developing the Specialist Disability Accommodation
(SDA) market for greater certainty in the process, the NDIA engaged Liveable Housing
Australia (LHA) to develop a technical guide for expanding the amount of relevant detail
available for the build of SDA dwellings.
The SDA Design outlines the detailed design requirements for newly built SDA seeking
enrolment under the NDIS. This standard has four categories of SDA design, as set out in the
SDA Rules (2020):
 Improved Liveability
 Robust
 Fully Accessible
 High Physical Support
In particular, the SDA type ‘Improved Liveability’ has been designed to improve
‘Liveability’ by incorporating a reasonable level of physical access and enhanced provision
for people with sensory, intellectual or cognitive impairment.
The SDA Design Standard will be reviewed in 2023.
Recommendation 70
The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with state and
territory governments and relevant stakeholders to develop housing strategies to
encourage the construction of social housing that responds to the needs of autistic
people in relation to housing design and type.
Noted
The Australian Government provides around $1.6 billion each year to states and territories
to improve housing and homelessness outcomes through the National Housing and
Homelessness Agreement (NHHA).
To receive funding under the NHHA, state and territory governments are required to have
publicly available housing and homelessness strategies and contribute to improved data
collection and reporting.
The Productivity Commission is currently undertaking a review of the NHHA including the
extent to which the NHHA is meeting the obligations of governments under
Australia’s Disability Strategy. The final report is due to be delivered to the
Australian Government before 31 August 2022.
49
The Australian and state and territory governments continue to engage actively on housing
issues for people with disability through regular meetings of Disability Ministers.
The Australian Government has also made a commitment to develop a National Housing and
Homelessness Plan. The Australian Government will work collaboratively with states and
territories and key stakeholders to design and implement the plan.
Recommendation 71
The committee recommends that the National Disability Insurance Agency work
with state and territory governments and non-government housing providers to
increase the supply of the 'robust' category of Specialist Disability Accommodation.
Supported in principle
In 2019 the NDIA undertook a limited cost assumptions review of Specialist Disability
Accommodation (SDA) pricing, specifically to identify where market supply was not
increasing as expected. One result from this review was to increase the SDA price caps for
‘robust’ dwellings of between 9.4 per cent and 14.1 per cent. Since that time a steady increase
in supply has been achieved. There are currently 441 dwellings enrolled in the ‘robust’
category.
SDA dwelling enrolment data also indicates that there are currently 334 brand new dwellings
(equivalent to 624 rooms) under construction, which are intended to be enrolled in the
‘robust SDA’ category. These are being built by registered SDA providers including
community housing providers and developers who are yet to engage or register as an SDA
provider.
The NDIA also undertakes regular market development activities, most recently focussed
on supporting both state and territory governments and other SDA providers to consider and
develop renewal programs of their existing SDA stock. In the majority this stock is ageing,
and as more contemporary homes are established using the SDA Design Standard,
this need for redevelopment or refurbishment is increasing.
The SDA Pricing Review was scheduled to take place through the first half of 2023,
however a decision has been made to commence this earlier to support investor and market
confidence. Robust SDA pricing will be considered as part of the price review. Any changes
from the review will only come into effect from 1 July 2023.
The NDIA is continuously improving the structured data available on SDA and continues
to work with states and territories to ensure housing and accommodation is available for
NDIS participants, including ensuring participants have access to affordable, accessible,
and appropriate housing.
50
Recommendation 72
The committee recommends the National Disability Insurance Agency work with
state and territory governments to clarify the intersection of responsibilities in relation
to housing for people with complex support needs.
Noted
The responsibilities of the Commonwealth and states and territories with respect to the
provision of housing for people with disability are clearly outlined in the Applied Principles
and Tables of Support (APTOS).
States and territories remain responsible for the provision of day-to-day housing and
homelessness services, including providing social and affordable housing for people with
disability who are not eligible for reasonable and necessary housing supports under the NDIS.
The Australian Government will endeavour to ensure that the NDIA and state and territory
agencies continue to engage effectively in line with these agreed responsibilities.
Justice
Recommendation 73
The committee recommends that, as part of the inquiry into the National Disability
Insurance Scheme proposed in Recommendation 6, the Complex Support Needs
Pathway be reviewed to ensure its focus is on preventing (rather than responding
to) escalating behaviours that may result in interactions with the justice system.
Supported in principle
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in principle.
The Complex Support Needs (CSN) pathway identifies personal and situational factors that
may require early intervention supports to prevent a NDIS participant from entering the
justice system. These supports include but are not limited to: specialist behaviour intervention
and training, increased ratio of support, multi-disciplinary therapy teams and specialist
support coordination. These types of supports can reduce the likelihood of behaviours
of concern and can support the participant to access other mainstream services and support.
The NDIA is continuously improving the CSN pathway to ensure a stronger focus
on high risk, vulnerable participants with proactive monitoring and intervention as required.
This includes a stronger focus on supporting participants who are at risk, or currently within,
the justice system.
Additionally, NDIA Justice Liaison Officers are working collaboratively with
Youth Justice state and territory representatives to support participants or prospective
participants in diversionary programs from entering the justice system.
51
Recommendation 74
The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with states and
territory governments and relevant stakeholders to investigate options for
diversionary programs, rather that custodial sentences, where appropriate.
Supported in principle
Noting that diversionary programs are largely a matter for state and territory governments,
the Australian Government supports in principle the improvement of diversionary pathways
to ensure they deliver better outcomes for justice-engaged autistic people.
Recommendation 75
The committee recommends embedding autism as part of initial education courses
and ongoing professional development requirements for all personnel involved in
the justice system, including police, lawyers, and court staff.
Supported in principle
Although judicial education is voluntary in Australia, the need for and benefits of ongoing
professional development for judicial officers is widely accepted. Consistent with the
independence of the judiciary from the executive, it is a matter for each federal court to
determine its own practices. For example, this is the case with respect to oversight of internal
programs of continued judicial education and development, internal training for court staff
and promoting any education programs offered by external providers.
The Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia currently provides online disability
awareness training for court staff, through the ‘Let’s Talk Access to Justice for People with
Disability’ eLearning package. This is designed to assist participants to develop the
knowledge, skills and awareness to work inclusively and effectively with people with
disabilities.
In 2020, a professional development session on the topic of adults and children with
intellectual and developmental disabilities was delivered to the then Federal Circuit Court’s
Court Child Experts, with the session also being open to judges and registrars. A specific
session in relation to autism is currently being explored in the Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia, reflecting the increased awareness and diagnoses of autism in the
community.
The Australian Government also contributes funding to the National Judicial College of
Australia (NJCA) and the Australasian Institute of Judicial Administration (AIJA).
NJCA supports the provision of education and training programs for judicial officers.
AIJA develops and provides educational programs for judicial officers, court administrators
and members of the legal profession in relation to court administration and judicial systems.
It is open to federal judges to participate in external judicial education courses offered
by NJCA and AIJA.
The Australian Government will engage with NJCA, AIJA and the federal courts
to encourage their consideration of the committee’s final report and this recommendation.
52
The Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions (CDPP) Witness Assistance Service
(WAS) provides information and support to victims of crime and vulnerable witnesses
including:
 Information concerning the legal process and court procedures;
 A liaison role between victims/witnesses and CDPP legal staff;
 Updates in relation to key developments concerning the case;
 A court familiarisation tour;
 Referral to counselling and other services in the community (for a victim who has
been diagnosed with autism, attempts would be made to identify specific services
if required); and
 Information about Victim Impact Statements and Reparation Orders.
The WAS Service takes steps to ensure that victims are supported when attending court,
and also assists with debriefing with victims after court.
WAS officers are qualified social workers with experience working with vulnerable client
groups. The WAS team aim to ensure the information and support provided to victims meets
their individual needs. The vulnerabilities that victims can experience are diverse and may
include autism. The WAS approach may be guided by the victim and where appropriate,
members of their support network including family members and professional service
providers.
The CDPP Victims and Witnesses website provides further information regarding the role of
the WAS and the CDPP, and various external support services available to victims of crime
and witnesses: Victims and Witnesses.
The Australian Federal Police (AFP) provides autism awareness training to its members and
is undertaking research to further embed neurodiversity related information into AFP training
materials and strategies.
Recommendation 76
The committee recommends that all jurisdictions encourage the adoption of
community policing approaches in order to build understanding and trust between
police and the autistic community.
Noted
The Australian Government notes it is a matter for state and territory police.
The Australian Federal Police, through their ACT Policing responsibilities, supports and
adopts a community policing approach in order to build understanding and trust between
police and the autistic community.
53
Recommendation 77
The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with states and
territory governments to promote a culture in the justice system where autistic
people feel supported to disclose their diagnosis and where people with
undiagnosed disabilities feel comfortable requesting an assessment.
Supported in principle
The Australian Government considers that the justice system should be accessible to all users,
including people with disabilities.
Having regard to the range of disabilities that court users may experience and the unique
needs of any individual with a disability, general information is provided on the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia, and the Federal Court of Australia’s websites
about the process for requesting reasonable adjustments. Reasonable adjustments could
include any adjustments for someone who discloses a diagnosis of autism. In addition
to a party or their legal representative making a request pursuant to this process, the courts
through their proactive case management can explore what supports or reasonable
adjustments may be made at various stages of court proceedings.
Consistent with the independence of the judiciary from the executive, the federal courts are
each responsible for their own operation and management, including the development and
maintenance of organisational culture.
Recommendation 78
The committee recommends that the Australian Government work with state and
territory governments and relevant stakeholders to develop nationally consistent
guidance on the type of adjustments that should be made available to autistic people
in justice settings. This should include:
 the provision of autism-friendly information resources;
 the involvement of disability advocates as standard practice in police
interviews and during court proceedings; and
 adjustments to physical environments and police and court interview
processes.
Supported in principle
The Disability Discrimination Act 1992 (Cth) (the Act) requires reasonable adjustments
to be made available to people with disability in justice settings, unless doing so would cause
unjustifiable hardship. Specifically, the Act is in place to eliminate discrimination against
people with disability as far as possible, and to promote community acceptance of the
principle that people with disability have the same fundamental rights as all members of the
community.
54
The Act provides that direct and indirect discrimination on the basis of disability is unlawful
in a broad range of areas of public life, relevantly including access to premises and access
to goods, services and facilities. The Act requires reasonable adjustments to be made in the
aforementioned areas of public life. A reasonable adjustment is a measure or action taken to
assist a person with disability to participate on the same basis as others.
Consistent with the independence of the judiciary from the executive, it is a matter for each
of the federal courts to implement any guidance on the type of adjustments that should be
made available to autistic people in justice settings.
The Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions (CDPP) Witness Assistance Service
(WAS) provides information and support to victims of crime and vulnerable witnesses
including:
 Information concerning the legal process and court procedures;
 A liaison role between victims/witnesses and CDPP legal staff;
 Updates in relation to key developments concerning the case;
 A court familiarisation tour;
 Referral to counselling and other services in the community (for a victim who has
been diagnosed with autism, attempts would be made to identify specific services
if required); and
 Information about Victim Impact Statements and Reparation Orders.
The WAS Service also takes steps to ensure that victims are supported when attending court,
and also assists with debriefing with victims after court.
WAS officers are qualified social workers with experience working with vulnerable
client groups. The WAS team aim to ensure the information and support provided to victims
meets their individual needs. The vulnerabilities that victims can experience are diverse and
may include autism. The WAS approach may be guided by the victim and where appropriate,
members of their support network including family members and professional service
providers.
The CDPP Victims and Witnesses website provides further information regarding the role
of the WAS and the CDPP, and various external support services available to victims
of crime and witnesses: Victims and Witnesses.
The Australian Federal Police (AFP) has autism awareness training available to AFP
members and is undertaking research to further embed neurodiversity related information into
AFP training materials and strategies, to assist members when interacting with autistic
people.
55
Recommendation 79
The committee recommends that, as part of the inquiry into the National Disability
Insurance Scheme proposed in Recommendation 6, the effectiveness of the
National Disability Insurance Agency's response to previous recommendations of
the Joint Standing Committee on the NDIS be assessed in relation to support for
autistic people within the justice system.
Supported in principle
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in principle.
The NDIA, in consultation with the Department of Social Services and the states and
territories, has implemented actions to improve the NDIS interface with justice systems,
including the development of operational guidelines for participants or prospective
participants in the justice system and the implementation of Justice Liaison Officers across
the country.
Recommendation 80
The committee recommends that the National Disability Insurance Agency publish:
 the findings of its review into the Complex Support Needs Pathway; and
 the Maintaining Critical Supports Framework, including its policy on provider of
last resort arrangements.
Supported
Proposed changes to the Complex Support Needs Pathway and related initiatives will be
published as updates to the service model are finalised and endorsed.
Recommendation 81
The committee recommends that, as part of the inquiry into the National Disability
Insurance Scheme proposed in Recommendation 6, the effectiveness of the Justice Liaison
Officer program be assessed in relation to supporting the transition of autistic people from
detention settings into the community.
Supported in principle
The Australian Government supports this recommendation in principle.
The NDIA continues to work with state and territory governments to improve information
sharing to support the effective delivery of both NDIS and mainstream services to NDIS
participants.
The Australian Government has already developed a national standard practice map to help
guide both NDIA and state and territory justice staff working with NDIS participants,
and published NDIS Justice Operational Guidelines to assist participants and the community
in understanding how the NDIS provides supports for participants in custody and when they
leave custody.
56
The Justice Liaison Officer (JLO) service offer assists prospective and current NDIS
participants who intersect with the justice system. This includes working in partnership with
mainstream justice services to ensure NDIS supports and services are delivered in a timely
manner to support effective and person-centred transition. The NDIA continues to enhance
and grow the JLO service offer in consultation with key stakeholders.
Australian Greens Senator’s Dissenting Report
Recommendation 1
That the Australian Government takes urgent steps to ensure that all policies
relating to autistic people:
 place the perspective of autistic people at the centre;
 are evidence informed and human rights-based;
 are informed by the social and affirmative model of disability; and
 are aligned with Australia's commitments under the United Nations Convention on
the Rights of People with Disabilities.
Supported in principle
The Australian Government considers that the implementation of Recommendation 18 of the
committee’s report would be strengthened by being implemented in conjunction with the
elements of Recommendation 1 of the Dissenting Report.
These elements mirror the Guiding Principles of the Closing the Gap Disability Sector
Strengthening Plan, and Australia’s Disability Strategy, which is based on the social model
of disability and aligned with the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities.
Recommendation 2
That the National Autism Strategy:
 closely align with the National Disability Strategy to recognise the
interaction between autism and other disabilities and mental illnesses;
 focus on the autistic community and that a separate strategy is considered
which focuses on the families and carers to recognise the individual access
needs and support requirements of these two groups; and
 is created through a process of co-design with autistic people and those
they choose as support people, the Disability Royal Commission and
stakeholder groups, with the recognition that its design may or may not
align with the recommendations of this report.
Supported in principle
Alignment of a National Autism Strategy to Australia’s Disability Strategy, recognition of the
interaction between autism and other disabilities, a focus on the autistic community and
families and carers, and a co-design process, will be considered in the development
of a National Autism Strategy.
57
Recommendation 3
That the Australian Government transition to a fully inclusive education system
by 2030, through a National Inclusive Education Transition Plan with disabled
people, families, disability representative organisations, education experts,
teachers, and their unions.
Noted
The Australian Government supports the rights of children and young people with disability
to have the same educational opportunities as other school students.
While the Australian Government provides substantial funding for government and
non-government schools, and works collaboratively with states and territories in developing
national priorities for education, it does not have a direct role in the administration
or operation of schools.
Under Australian constitutional arrangements, responsibility for the delivery of school
education, including decisions on schooling options for autistic students, rests with the
individual education authorities in each state and territory.
Recommendation 4
All further research, education and training relating to autistic people should be
co-designed and co-delivered by autistic people.
Supported
The Australian Government supports the development of a whole-of-life plan for all autistic
Australians, including the importance of further research, education and training relating to
autistic people being co-designed and co-delivered by autistic people.
Any representative or authoritative body established in conjunction with the co-design,
development and/or implementation of a National Autism Strategy would also align with the
Commonwealth’s commitment to Priority Reform One: Formal Partnerships and Shared
Decision-Making of the National Agreement on Closing the Gap.
Representation of First Nations people with disability would be meaningful, gender sensitive,
culturally appropriate and determined in consultation with key stakeholders, including but not
limited to the First Peoples Disability Network.
Recommendation 5
That an easy-read version of the committee's report and this dissenting report be
distributed so that it is widely accessible to the autistic community.
Noted
This is a matter for consideration of the committee.
58
