OFFICIAL
Australian Government response to the
Senate Community Affairs References Committee report:
Issues related to menopause and perimenopause
FEBRUARY 2025
Page 1 of 32
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Overview
On 6 November 2023, the Senate referred an inquiry into the Issues related to menopause and
perimenopause to the Senate Community Affairs References Committee (Committee).
The Committee report highlights the challenges women experience in relation to perimenopause and
menopause. This included issues related to accessing adequate healthcare and also the challenges
experienced within workplaces. The Australian Government would like to thank those that gave their
time and expertise to the Committee, particularly the women who shared their lived experience.
Supporting, protecting and promoting the health of all women, girls and gender diverse people is a
key priority for the Government. This includes addressing the key risk factors that can reduce the
quality of life, and better manage the varied needs of women, as they age. That is why the
Government established the National Women’s Health Advisory Council (the Council) in 2023, to
bring together diverse expertise to examine the unique challenges that women and girls experience
in the health system.
The Council provides advice and recommendations directly to Government to improve health
outcomes for women and girls in Australia, along with advice on the implementation of the National
Women’s Health Strategy 2020–2030 (the Strategy). The Strategy outlines a national approach to
improving health outcomes for all women and girls. A key action identified in the Strategy is to
support women and their healthcare providers to manage the effects of menopause, which includes
increasing training for health professionals. The Government recognises the importance of improving
the awareness of, and encouraging further research and support services, for women experiencing
perimenopause and menopause.
That is why the Government is investing $64.5 million over three years from 2025-26 to increase
access to specialist care for women’s health with a focus on perimenopause and menopause. This
includes:
• the development of a national campaign to raise awareness of the symptoms and
management options for menopause,
• increased training and support for health professionals, including the development of
national guidelines to provide consistent advice and support to women,
• expanding the scope of Endometriosis and Pelvic Pain Clinics to include specialised support
relating to menopause and perimenopause,
• a new Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) health assessment service for menopause and
perimenopause.
The Government is also continuing to invest in treatments for menopause through the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS).
This builds on the Government’s 2024-25 Budget investment of over $160 million in a tailored
women’s health package to tackle gender bias in the health system, upskill medical professionals and
improve sexual and reproductive care.
The Government continues to support women experiencing perimenopause and menopause through
a number a national policies, funding for public hospitals through the National Health Reform
Agreement, MBS rebates for relevant health services including consultation and telehealth, subsidies
for approved medications through the PBS, and funding for mental health services outside the MBS.
Page 2 of 32
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
The Government also provides access to health information, investment for clinical care tools, health
professional training, and provides funding for research initiatives and data collections relevant to
menopause.
The Government’s response supports (or supports in principle) 16 out of the 25 recommendations,
and notes 9.
A number of recommendations given in-principle support, may relate to matters where further
collaboration with stakeholders is required or where there are existing activities underway which go
to addressing the intent of the recommendation.
The Government acknowledges other women-related policies, such as Working for Women:
A Strategy for Gender Equality and the Senate inquiry into universal access to reproductive
healthcare also reflect the Government’s commitment to improve outcomes for women.
Page 3 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 1
1: The Committee recommends that the Department of Health and Aged Care commission research
to establish a comprehensive evidence base about the impacts of menopause and perimenopause on
women in Australia, including:
• Menopause differentiated from midlife stressors.
• Mental health impacts of menopause.
• Early menopause.
The research should also establish an understanding of experiences for:
• Culturally and linguistically diverse women.
• First Nations women.
• LGBTQIA+ individuals.
• Women living with a disability.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
The Government recognises the importance of increasing the evidence base in women’s health
including the experiences of women from priority populations.
The Government provides direct support for health and medical research though the National Health
and Medical Research Council (NHMRC), which focuses on supporting investigator-led research.
Between 2010 and 2023 the NHMRC expended $23.5 million towards research relevant to
menopause and perimenopause.
To further support research development, up to $25 million of funding over four years from 2024-25
has been made available for the 2024 Medical Research Future Fund (MRFF) Emerging Priorities and
Consumer Driven Research (EPCDR) Infertility, Pregnancy Loss and Menopause Grant Opportunity
which includes a focus on perimenopause and menopause research. The Grant Opportunity closed
on 6 November 2024. Application outcomes are expected by May 2025, with research projects
anticipated to be undertaken from 2025 to 2029.
Through the Grant Opportunity, two streams have a focus on perimenopause and menopause
research and applications were invited for a large-scale multidisciplinary project, co-designed with
consumers, to identify and evaluate the impacts of perimenopause and menopause on health and
wellbeing, that will:
• Investigate menopause symptoms that impact on physical health, mental health and
wellbeing, including psychosocial factors.
• Investigate impacts on workforce engagement and retention, including on paid and unpaid
employment.
• Include research participants from metropolitan areas (MM1) and regional, rural and/or
remote locations (MM2-7), according to the Modified Monash Model.
• Consider diverse populations (e.g. individuals from culturally and linguistically diverse
communities).
Page 4 of 32
OFFICIAL
• A research project to investigate the biological mechanisms or risk factors that underpin
early or medically induced menopause.
The Government is also investing $5.5 million over three years from 2024–25 for the Australian
Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) to establish a sexual and reproductive health data set to help
inform sexual and reproductive health policy and improve healthcare access outcomes.
Perimenopause and menopause will be a key priority area in this work program, which will include
an extensive consultation process to identify the information needs and data gaps (including those
identified in the Senate Inquiry report), scope options for improved data collection and commence
data development and collection where applicable. This work will contribute to the evidence base on
perimenopause and menopause in Australia, including for populations groups such as women from
CALD communities, First Nations women, women living with a disability and LGBTQIA+ individuals.
Page 5 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 2
2: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government launch a national menopause and
perimenopause awareness campaign, providing information and resources for women and
communities across Australia. This awareness campaign should be designed in consultation with
experts and people with lived experience.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
Recognising the low level of awareness and understanding of menopause in the general community,
and even at times, the medical community, the Government will invest $12.8 million over two years
from 2025-26 to undertake a public health campaign to help raise awareness of perimenopause and
menopause symptoms and management options. The campaign will aim to increase understanding
of the impact perimenopause and menopause can have on the physical, mental and emotional
wellbeing of women, seek to address misinformation, and support women to adopt preventive
actions. The campaign will also target health practitioners to increase their understanding of the
impacts of this life stage and promote resources for the treatment of menopause symptoms.
The Government continues to support the provision of factual, evidence-based and trusted health
information. There are several existing sources of government-funded information on women’s
health, including through key life stages such as perimenopause and menopause, such as:
• Healthdirect Australia, a consumer health information website, app and telephone line
providing free resources related to menopause, including information on perimenopause,
early menopause, Hormone Replacement Therapy/Menopausal Hormone Therapy and post-
menopause.
• Jean Hailes for Women’s Health, a national, not-for-profit organisation providing free,
evidenced-based information on women’s health with a particular focus on menopause.
Funding to Jean Hailes for Women’s Health supports the development and publication of
resources on menopause symptoms, causes, risk factors and management options. This
includes tailored information for First Nations women, women from multicultural
communities and Easy Read resources.
• Health in My Language (HIML) a national health education program delivering multilingual
information to migrant and refugee communities from trained bicultural health educators
across Australia. The program is conducted in culturally-safe conversations, in person and in
their languages. HIML is managed by the Multicultural Centre for Women’s Health.
Page 6 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 3
3: The Committee recommends that, in the next review of the Australian Curriculum, the Australian
Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority (ACARA) consider how menopause can be expressly
referenced in the menstrual health and reproductive cycles content within the Health and Physical
Education learning area.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Australian Curriculum, Version 9.0 was signed off by Education Ministers on 1 April 2022.
The Australian Curriculum addresses reproductive and sexual health as part of the Health and
Physical Education (HPE) curriculum in an age-appropriate way across the years of schooling from
Foundation to Year 10.
In HPE, students learn about the different changes and transitions they may experience including
physical, social and emotional changes associated with puberty.
Whilst the terms ‘menstruation’, ‘period’ and 'menopause' are not mentioned explicitly in the HPE
curriculum, it is expected that menstruation and period would form part of the learning about the
changes associated with puberty. Menopause may be addressed depending on the needs and
interests of the local school context.
Education is a shared responsibility between the Government and state and territory governments.
State and territory governments and the non-government school sector have responsibility for the
implementation of the curriculum within their schools, including in the choice of resources to
support teachers to implement the curriculum.
Page 7 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 4
4: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government commission research to undertake a
comprehensive study to assess the economic impacts of menopause which clearly delineates the
impact of symptoms of menopause on women’s workforce participation, income, superannuation,
and age of retirement.
The Australian Government supports in-principle this recommendation.
The 2024 MRFF EPCDR Infertility, Pregnancy Loss and Menopause Grant Opportunity (stream four,
refer recommendation 1 response) has a focus on perimenopause and menopause research to
investigate impacts on workforce engagement and retention, including on paid and unpaid
employment. The Grant Opportunity closed on 6 November 2024, with funding expected to
commence from June 2025.
The Government provides core funding to the Australian Longitudinal Study on Women’s Health
(ALSWH). The population-based survey examines the health and wellbeing of over 57,000 Australian
women across 4 cohorts. The study has provided data on the health of Australian women since 1995
and supports evidence-based policy and practice in many areas of women’s health. ALSWH has
commenced collecting data on the potential impact of menopause on workforce participation.
Page 8 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 5
5: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government introduce reforms to allow the
Workplace Gender Equality Agency (WGEA) to re-commence data collection on the supports
employers are providing, and their usage, for employees experiencing menopause and
perimenopause, including specific workplace policies.
The Australian Government supports in-principle this recommendation.
The Government is considering options to enable WGEA to collect data on the supports employers
are providing for employees experiencing menopause and perimenopause, including specific
workplace policies. This may require amendments to WGEA’s legislative framework. The
Government recognises the need to understand the nature of existing workplace supports and their
impact on gender equality and the role WGEA could play in collecting this data as recommended by
the Senate Inquiry.
Page 9 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 6
6: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider amendments to Section 65
of the Fair Work Act 2009, to ensure women can access flexible working arrangements during
menopause.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Government is committed to gender equality and has implemented a number of reforms to help
more employees access flexible working arrangements including through the Fair Work Amendment
(Secure Jobs, Better Pay) Act 2022. An independent statutory review of the Secure Jobs, Better Pay
Act has commenced. It will consider whether changes to the right to request flexible working
arrangements are operating appropriately and effectively and whether there are any unintended
consequences of the reforms. Any further changes to flexible work arrangements should be
considered in light of the outcomes of this review.
Flexibility entitlements within the Fair Work Act 2009
The National Employment Standards (NES) in the Fair Work Act 2009 include a right to request
flexible working arrangements for eligible employees. The Secure Jobs, Better Pay reforms,
strengthened the right including by:
• Introducing a new procedure for how employers must respond to requests such as requiring
employers to respond within 21 days and only refuse on reasonable business grounds after
taking certain steps.
• Enabling the Fair Work Commission to deal with disputes.
• Expanding eligibility to employees who are pregnant as well as to situations where employees
or members of their family, or household, are experiencing family or domestic violence.
Employees who are 55 or older and meet eligibility criteria have the right to request flexible working
arrangements.
The Government is also committed to protecting and facilitating workers’ access to their
entitlements. Recent legislative reform to the Fair Work Act as part of the Fair Work Legislation
Amendment (Closing Loopholes No.2) Act 2024 included measures to change the defence to sham
contracting and restore a fair, objective definition of employment and casual work which seeks to
ensure fewer workers miss out on entitlements, including their right to request flexible working
arrangements, due to misclassification.
Other mechanisms for accessing flexible working arrangements
The Government recognises many employees experiencing menopause will be under the age of 55
and may not meet any of the other circumstances to have a right to request flexible working
arrangements under the NES. Employees without a right to request flexible working arrangements
under the NES may be able to access flexible work in other ways.
Page 10 of 32
OFFICIAL
In May 2023, employees whose wages are set by modern awards or registered agreements made up
57.2%1 of Australian employees. These employees can access flexible work through Individual
Flexibility Arrangements which enable an employee and employer to agree to vary the effect of the
award or agreement to meet the genuine needs of the employee and employer.
Employees may also be able to access flexible working arrangements through workplace policies,
conversations with their managers or by bargaining for access to better entitlements.
The Government has improved access to bargaining through the supported bargaining stream which
will help workers in lower paid and feminised sectors to negotiate better pay and conditions for
themselves.
The Fair Work Commission is currently considering including a working from home term in the Clerks
– Private Sector Award 2020 which set the pay for 91,506 employees2 (80.8%3 of whom are female)
in May 2021. The Fair Work Commission has indicated that this may serve as a model term for other
awards.
1 Australian Bureau of Statistics, https://www.abs.gov.au/statistics/labour/earnings-and-working-
conditions/employee-earnings-and-hours-australia/latest-release#method-of-setting-pay
2 Fair Work Commission, https://www.fwc.gov.au/documents/wage-reviews/2022-23/profile-of-employee-
characteristics-across-modern-awards-2023-03-03.pdf
3 Fair Work Commission, am202321-gender-prism-180724.pdf (fwc.gov.au)
Page 11 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 7
7: The Committee encourages Australian workplaces develop perimenopause and menopause
workplace policies in consultation with their employees.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation recognising it is directed towards all
Australian workplaces.
As a model employer, the Government supports Australian Public Service (APS) agencies to establish
policies that will progress gender equality and contribute to positive economic and work outcomes
for Australian women. The Australian Public Service Commission will support APS agencies to
develop workplace policies on perimenopause and menopause.
Currently, APS agencies can leverage existing entitlements to support employees experiencing
symptoms associated with perimenopause and menopause. This includes the forward leaning ability
to request flexible working arrangements and accrual of at least 18 days paid personal leave per year
for full-time employees.
Page 12 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 8
8: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government task the Department of Employment
and Workplace Relations to undertake further research on the impact and effectiveness of sexual and
reproductive health leave where it has been implemented in Australia and overseas, while giving
consideration to introducing paid gender-inclusive reproductive leave in the National Employment
Standards (NES) and modern awards.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations monitors and considers developments
related to sexual and reproductive health leave using publicly available information. This includes
high-level monitoring of domestic and international examples of reproductive health leave.
The Department of Employment and Workplace Relations is aware some countries have legislated
menstrual leave and some are considering reproductive leave. The Department of Employment and
Workplace Relations will continue to monitor these at a high-level but notes evidence of
effectiveness may be limited or inaccessible. The relevancy of international examples may also be
low given many countries have very different workplace relations contexts. For example, Spain has
implemented menstrual leave however it is social security based not employer funded like
Australian personal/carer’s leave entitlements.
The Fair Work Act 2009 NES provide permanent employees with an entitlement to paid
personal/carer’s leave, which can be taken when an employee is unfit for work because of a
personal illness or injury, or caring responsibilities.
The Government acknowledges that reproductive health leave provisions are being adopted in some
workplaces in Australia, directly by employers or through enterprise agreements. The Department of
Employment and Workplace Relations has captured IVF/reproductive leave, menstrual leave and
menopause leave in its database of approved enterprise agreements since 2023. This information
will continue to be captured, providing insights into the implementation of reproductive health leave
entitlements in Australian workplaces.
The Government notes the Fair Work Commission, Australia’s independent industrial relations
tribunal, is responsible for setting award wages and conditions for national system employees. While
the Government does not have standing to apply to vary modern awards, employees and employers
covered by an award, or organisations entitled to represent their industrial interests, can apply to
the Fair Work Commission at any time to vary award wages and conditions.
Page 13 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 9
9: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government encourage the Australian Medical
Council to consider explicitly including menopause and perimenopause in the Graduate Outcome
Statements of the Standards for Assessment and Accreditation of Primary Medical Programs. The
committee further recommends that menopause and perimenopause be included in graduate
outcomes for other health professionals, including nurses and physiotherapists.
The Australian Government supports in-principle this recommendation.
Changes to the Australian Medical Council (AMC) accreditation standards including graduate
outcomes will require a consultation process (including public consultation). This is a requirement
under the Health Practitioner Regulation National Law Act 2009 as in force in each state and
territory. This recommendation links with recommendation 10.
The Department of Health and Aged Care has raised with the AMC opportunities to further
strengthen accreditation processes to improve medical practitioner, knowledge and skills on
menopause/perimenopause and broader women’s health issues. The department has recently
written to the AMC requesting formal consultation on improvements to Accreditation standards to
include references to menopause and perimenopause.
Page 14 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 10
10: The Committee recommends that the Australian Medical Council work with Medical Deans
Australia and New Zealand to ensure that menopause and perimenopause modules are included in
all medical university curriculums.
The Australian Government supports-in-principle this recommendation.
In its formal request to the Australian Medical Council (AMC), the Government will encourage the
AMC to work with the Medical Deans Australia and New Zealand to prioritise health practitioner
knowledge and skills in menopause within upcoming accreditation reviews of medical programs of
study, undertaken by AMC.
The Medical Deans Australia and New Zealand attended a roundtable on health care to support
diverse communities in June 2024, where they discussed strategies to address bias within the health
system for women and diverse population groups, including through education curricula.
As part of its 2024-25 workplan, the National Women’s Health Advisory Council have agreed to an
activity to support an audit of health and medical education curricula to ensure the inclusion of sex
and gender awareness, to help address bias in the health system for women and diverse population
groups. This could include ensuring that topics specific to women and gender diverse people, like
menopause and perimenopause, are included in all medical university curriculums.
This recommendation links with recommendation 9.
Page 15 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 11
11: The Committee recommends that all governments and the medical colleges work together to
require and facilitate further education on menopause and perimenopause for physicians practising
in the public health system across Australia.
The Australian Government supports-in-principle this recommendation.
Medical colleges are independent membership-based organisations. Governments do not have
authority to direct medical colleges. The Independent review of complexity in the National
Registration and Accreditation Scheme is currently under way. Its Terms of Reference includes
whether additional levers should be available to governments to direct accreditation authorities. The
final report is expected in April 2025. This recommendation links with recommendation 9.
The Government is also investing $2.9 million over three years from 2025-26 to develop national
clinical guidelines for perimenopause and menopause. National clinical guidelines will ensure
information for clinicians is nationally consistent, evidence based and readily available to support
consistent care for women experiencing perimenopause and menopause.
Page 16 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 12
12: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government considers increasing funding and
expand the recipient base for the delivery of incentivised continuing professional development to
medical practitioners on perimenopause and menopause.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
Medical practitioners are responsible for choosing continuing professional development that aligns
with their patient and community needs.
The 2024-25 Budget included investment of approximately $1.2 million over two years from 2024-25
to support training for up to 11,000 health professionals to better treat, care and manage women’s
health during menopause and perimenopause. The measure aims to support placements for health
professionals on a Continuing Professional Development (CPD) course on managing menopause,
offered by Jean Hailes for Women’s Health.
An additional investment of $1.5 million over three years from 2025-26 has been provided for
targeted promotion and incentive opportunities to encourage more health professionals to
undertake CPD training to prioritise menopause specific professional development.
Page 17 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 13
13: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider how to expand the scope
of practice of nurse practitioners to ensure better support for women experiencing menopause in
rural and regional areas.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
Nurse practitioners support women with menopause and perimenopause, across all settings,
including rural and remote. The Government recognises barriers exist which prevent nurse
practitioners providing complete care and health services to women. Accordingly, it has
implemented the following measures to increase access to nurse practitioner care:
• From 1 July 2024, patient benefits for general attendances by a nurse practitioner increased
by 30 per cent.
• From 1 July 2024, nurse practitioners became eligible to participate in multidisciplinary case
conferences for patients with chronic conditions.
• From 1 November 2024, nurse practitioners no longer need to be in a legislated
collaborative arrangement with a medical practitioner to render MBS services or prescribe
PBS medications.
Initial and subsequent consultations with women experiencing perimenopause and menopause
symptoms are often complex and require longer appointments for comprehensive consultation,
assessment, planning of care, and any interventions that may be required. Women in rural and
remote areas often travel long distances for appointments. From 1 March 2025, the Government will
introduce two new general attendance MBS items for nurse practitioners (face-to-face and
telehealth) of at least 60 minutes duration. These measures will support the time needed for women
seeking support for perimenopause and menopause to engage meaningfully with a nurse
practitioner and time for a nurse practitioner to provide comprehensive, high-quality care for
women.
In addition, the independent Unleashing the Potential of our Health Workforce (Scope of Practice)
Review was released on 5 November 2024. This review made recommendations to all Health
Ministers regarding enabling health professionals, including nurse practitioners, to work to their full
scope of practice. The Government will carefully consider the findings and recommendations of this
review alongside other recently-released primary care and workforce reviews.
Page 18 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 14 and Recommendation 15
14: The Committee recommends that the Department of Health and Aged Care, through the
Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) Continuous Review, review existing MBS item numbers relevant
for menopause and perimenopause consultations, including for longer consultations and mid-life
health checks, to assess whether these items are adequate to meet the needs of women experiencing
menopause.
15: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government consider whether a new MBS item
number or the expansion of criteria for the mid-life health check, is needed to support greater access
to primary care consultations for women during the menopause transition.
The Australian Government supports these recommendations.
The Government will establish a new MBS health assessment service for women experiencing
menopause or perimenopause. The Government has committed funding of $26 million over two
years, commencing from 2025-26, to introduce temporary items for this assessment service.
Ongoing arrangements for the item will be informed by outcomes from the review of MBS health
assessment services within primary care, expected in 2025.
All MBS health assessment items, including the 45–49-year-old health assessment (referred to by
some as the mid-life health check), are currently being reviewed with a view to ensuring they align
with current evidence and support contemporary clinical practice. As part of this, a systematic
literature review of the evidence base supporting health assessments and a detailed analysis of MBS
data have been undertaken. A public consultation period on the items and potential changes closed
on 30 September 2024.
The key MBS items for the management of all health conditions in primary care, including
menopause are currently under review through the MBS Continuous Review process.
The MBS Review Advisory Committee (MRAC) commenced a review of time-tiered items for primary
care in August 2024. The review will consider issues such as item consistency, opportunities to
streamline, and whether the current time-tiers appropriately support contemporary clinical practice.
The review is anticipated to be finalised and provided to Government at the end of 2025.
As part of the MBS Continuous Review, the Government has also committed to undertake an
evidence review on bone densitometry testing for women experiencing menopause. This review will
complement other review processes and will ensure existing MBS items are adequate to meet the
needs of women experiencing or transitioning to menopause.
Recommendations are expected to be provided to Government in early 2025. Any recommendations
will need to improve the framework in relation to alignment with current evidence and supporting
contemporary clinical practice.
Page 19 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 16
16: The Committee recommends that the Department of Health and Aged Care, including the
Therapeutic Goods Administration, consider action to address the shortages of menopause hormonal
therapy (MHT) in the Australian market and consider options to secure sufficient supply, including a
review of the supply chains and pricing trends of MHT, with a view to enabling universal affordable
access to treatment and care.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
Medicine shortages
The Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) recognises the importance of Menopausal Hormone
Therapy (MHT) and Hormone Replacement Therapy (HRT) medicines and the need to have reliable
access. Shortages of these medicines have a significant impact on the health and wellbeing of many
women in Australia.
Mandatory reporting of medicine shortages commenced in January 2019, with pharmaceutical
companies required to report to the TGA any current or anticipated supply disruptions for all
prescription medicines and certain over the counter (OTC) medicines. The TGA publishes shortage
information on the medicine shortage reports database and works collaboratively with medicine
sponsors, wholesalers and health professionals to determine whether additional actions are needed
to mitigate supply impacts.
The TGA proactively manages medicine shortages to reduce the impact on patients wherever
possible. Depending on the cause of the shortage, the TGA can take the following management
actions:
• Working with medicine sponsors and other stakeholders to manage inventory, including
supporting the fair distribution of stock in Australia.
• Approving the supply of overseas-registered alternative products under section 19A of the
Therapeutic Goods Act 1989 (Act).
• Allowing pharmacists to dispense certain identified substitute medicines when a medicine is
in shortage, by making a Serious Scarcity Substitution Instrument.
• Working with pharmaceutical companies to expedite regulatory processes that may
otherwise delay the supply of medicines.
• Collaborating with health professional and consumer groups to provide guidance on
managing demand during a shortage, including on prioritising prescribing for certain
conditions.
The TGA has been notified of shortages for numerous HRT patches, including all strengths of
Estradot, Estraderm MX and Estalis products, as well as the discontinuation of Climara patches.
The ongoing shortages of HRT patches is a global issue and is driven by various factors, including
manufacturing issues and unexpected increases in demand. The discontinuation of the Climara
brand of patches put additional strain on supply.
To support ongoing access for patients, the TGA has provided temporary approval for the supply of
multiple HRT medicines from overseas under section 19A of the Act.
From 1 June 2024, the Estradiol (Sandoz, USA) brand of HRT patches (several strengths) is also listed
on the PBS to provide subsidised access to this alternative product.
Page 20 of 32
OFFICIAL
The Department of Health and Aged Care has also issued a Notice under the Community Service
Obligation (CSO) Deed, enabling CSO Distributors (CSODs) to constrain available supplies and
facilitate equitable distribution of PBS-listed estradiol transdermal patches. This notice allows
individual CSODs to utilise their expertise in relation to the supply of medicines, to independently
determine the practices they can adopt to support equitable supply of these patches and prevent
stockpiling.
Up-to-date supply details, comprehensive background information, and advice about the HRT patch
shortages is available on a dedicated ‘HRT shortage’ webpage on the TGA website.
There are currently no reported shortages of alternative HRT presentations such as tablets, topical
creams or pessaries.
Medicine sponsors are private businesses and make their own decisions regarding if and how to
market a product in Australia. The TGA cannot compel them to register, market, manufacture or
continue supply of a medicine in Australia. However, the TGA does work with these companies to try
to minimise the effects of medicine shortages on patients.
The department continues to consider ways to better anticipate, manage and communicate
medicine shortages and discontinuations. Following a 2021 consultation on proposals to help ensure
reliable supply of important medicines, the TGA initiated mechanisms to prioritise evaluation of
applications for registration of medicines vulnerable to shortage. In 2024, the TGA extensively
consulted to better understand challenges and barriers experienced by consumers, health
professionals and industry relating to medicine shortages and discontinuations. This feedback is
being used to develop a work-plan for potential future reform.
Medicine shortages occur for many reasons and, unfortunately an uninterrupted supply chain can
never be guaranteed. Medicine sponsors generally maintain continuity of medicine supply through
demand forecasting, stock control, and back-up supply routes. However, situations may arise where
a disruption to the supply of a medicine cannot be avoided. The Government administers several
policies to ensure pharmaceutical companies supply PBS-subsidised medicines where possible.
For newly listed products on the PBS, pharmaceutical companies are required to provide an
assurance of supply, undertaking that sufficient stock of the product to meet demand will be
available in time for the first PBS listing day. In addition, Guarantee of Supply requirements outlined
in Division C, Part VII of the National Health Act 1953 apply to newly listed brands that are
bioequivalent or biosimilar to an existing listed brand and where a pharmaceutical company offers a
lower price. The Guarantee of Supply period ends after 24 months or until another brand assumes
the obligation.
In the event of a serious shortage, the TGA may also publish a Serious Scarcity Substitution
Instrument (SSSI) which allows community pharmacists to substitute specific medicines without
prior approval from the prescriber. The Government has implemented changes that allow PBS
subsidy in circumstances where the TGA has issued a SSSI. A list of scarce medicines that may be
substituted with specific medicines under the PBS is available on the PBS website at:
www.pbs.gov.au/info/browse/medicine-shortages.
Where an overseas marketed medicine has been approved under Section 19A of the Act for import
or supply in Australia, these medicines (s19A products) may be subsidised on the PBS via one of the
following methods:
Page 21 of 32
OFFICIAL
1. Eligible for existing subsidy: the s19A product may be automatically listed on the PBS, if the
drug, form, brand and manner of administration, as well as the cost are all the same as the
PBS-listed product in shortage. The responsible person of the PBS-listed product and the
s19A product must also be the same.
2. Recommended listing: where the supplier of the s19A product and the PBS-listed product
are not the same, or the form, brand and/or manner of administration differ the supplier of
the s19A product must make an application to list the item on the PBS. The Pharmaceutical
Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC) advises the Government on whether the s19A medicine
should be subsidised through the PBS and under what conditions. The PBAC, an independent
expert advisory body, advises the Government about whether the section 19A medicine
should be subsidised through the PBS and under what conditions.
Where the TGA has provided temporary approval for supply of an alternative brand of a medicine
under s19A, the Government works with the sponsor to expedite subsidisation of that brand
through the PBS. However, ultimately it is a decision made by the sponsor to list their s19A product.
A sponsor cannot be compelled by the Government to list a medicine on the PBS.
A list of current s19A products that are PBS listed is available on the PBS website at:
www.pbs.gov.au/info/browse/section-19A.
To date, there are three strengths of s19A estradiol patches [brand Estradiol Transdermal System
(Sandoz, USA)] temporarily listed on the PBS since 1 June 2024 to mitigate the shortages of estradiol
patches. The Department of Health and Aged Care is working with s19A suppliers to list additional
s19A estradiol patches on the PBS.
Page 22 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 17
17: The Committee recommends the Therapeutic Goods Administration continue to monitor the
advertising of alternative medicines and treatments in Australia and take action as appropriate. The
committee further recommends the Department of Health and Aged Care consider reviewing the
labelling of TGA approved medicines.
The Australian Government supports the recommendation for the TGA to continue to monitor
advertising alternative medicines and treatments in Australia as appropriate.
Detection and deterrence of the unlawful import, advertising and supply of medicines and medical
devices advertised as traditional or alternative treatments remains a TGA compliance priority in the
2024-25 financial year4.
The TGA will continue to monitor for potential unlawful advertising of therapeutic goods, including
alternative medicine and treatment products, in line with our regulatory compliance framework5.
A range of monitoring strategies are used to support the TGA’s compliance programs, which are
both proactive and responsive. This is important, given that areas of non-compliance are not limited
to current compliance priorities.
The TGA will also continue to work with online platforms, including social media platforms, to deter
and disrupt potential unlawful advertising via proactive engagement and monitoring of online
activity.
The Australian Government notes the recommendation for the Department of Health and Aged Care
to consider reviewing the labelling of TGA approved medicines.
The TGA will continue to monitor and review the labelling of TGA-approved medicines in Australia
and take action as appropriate. There are legislative requirements governing the information that
must be included on the labelling of therapeutic goods. Changes to these requirements would
require further consideration and public consultation.
4 https://www.tga.gov.au/how-we-regulate/compliance-and-enforcement-hub/compliance-management/import-
advertising-and-supply-compliance-priorities-2023-24
5 https://www.tga.gov.au/how-we-regulate/compliance-and-enforcement-hub/compliance-management/import-
advertising-and-supply-compliance-priorities-2023-24
Page 23 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 18
18: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government examine options to implement a
means of ensuring that MHT items are affordable and accessible, including consideration of domestic
manufacturing and alternate means of subsidising costs to the consumer. Such examination should
include, but not be limited to, considering ways to encourage pharmaceutical sponsors to list a
broader range of MHT items, such as body identical hormone therapy products, on the
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme to ensure appropriate access and lowered costs for all women who
need it.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
The Government understands that there are legitimate concerns from clinicians and consumers
about subsidised access to Menopausal Hormonal Therapy (MHT). The Government supports MHT
being affordable and accessible for all who need them. The PBS is the main mechanism through
which the Government subsidises medicines, including MHT.
Under legislation, the Government cannot list a medicine on the PBS unless the Pharmaceutical
Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC) makes a recommendation in favour of listing. The PBAC is an
independent and expert body, comprising doctors, health professionals, health economists and
consumer representatives.
To address barriers to accessing MHT, the Minister for Health and Aged Care referred the matter to
the PBAC for review.
When considering a medicine proposed for PBS listing, the PBAC is legally required to take into
account the comparative effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of the medicine compared to other
available therapies.
The PBAC’s consideration is generally initiated by the pharmaceutical company responsible for a
medicine, applying for the medicine to be considered for PBS listing. Although nothing prevents
other stakeholders from lodging PBAC submissions, the responsible pharmaceutical company usually
holds the scientific data and other information necessary to inform the PBAC’s consideration.
Pharmaceutical companies are private businesses that make their own decisions about whether to
apply for subsidy through the PBS. The Government cannot compel pharmaceutical companies to
seek PBS subsidies for their medicines.
At its November 2024 meeting, the PBAC recommended PBS listing of estradiol gel (Estrogel®), the
micronized progesterone product Prometrium®, and Estrogel Pro, a combination product containing
Estrogel and Prometrium. The outcomes from the November 2024 PBAC meeting are available on
the PBS website.
Alternate means of subsidy outside the PBS would risk undermining health technology assessment
processes that ensure value-for-money for taxpayers. The Government will continue to consider
how policies can encourage the appropriate availability of subsidised MHT.
Page 24 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 19
19: The Committee recommends that the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC)
reforms comparator selection during evaluation of new MHT items to include quality of life health
impacts. The committee also recommends that the PBAC regards body identical hormone therapy
products in a separate drug class to remove the lowest cost comparator to synthetic therapies.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation.
Measures of quality of life are routinely considered by the PBAC in its assessment of the clinical
effectiveness and cost effectiveness of a new medicine compared to alternative therapies, as
required under the National Health Act 1953. The PBAC considers the information that is provided in
submissions, including information on quality-of-life impacts. Comments from consumers and other
stakeholders about a medicine are also provided to the PBAC for consideration. The PBAC is
committed to understanding consumer perspectives and integrating them into its consideration of
medicines.
The PBAC guidelines provide guidance to applicants regarding choice of appropriate comparators.
The National Health Act 1953 requires that for the PBAC to recommend PBS listing of medicine that
is more costly than alternatives, it must be satisfied that the new medicine delivers better health
outcomes than these alternatives.
The Government recognises the importance of ensuring that Health Technology Assessment (HTA)
policies and methods are continually evaluated and updated so that they remain fit for purpose,
keep pace with rapid advances in health technology, maintain the sustainability of the PBS, and
minimise barriers to access. The HTA Policy and Methods Review (HTA Review) was completed on
4 May 2024, and the final report published in September 2024. The HTA Review makes 50
recommendations for reform to the Australia's health technology assessment and funding
arrangements. An Implementation Advisory Group chaired by the former Chair of the PBAC,
Professor Andrew Wilson, will guide the reform process.
Page 25 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 20
20: The Committee recommends the Australasian Menopause Society regularly review and update
their guidance for medical practitioners around best practices in the treatment and management of
mental health symptoms.
Response:
The Australian Government notes this recommendation, recognising it is directed towards the
Australasian Menopause Society.
Page 26 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 21
21: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government work with state and territory
governments to implement or leverage existing women’s health facilities with multidisciplinary care,
including in the public health system, to better support women during the menopause transition
across Australia.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
The National Health Reform Agreement (NHRA) recognises state governments are the system
managers of their public hospital systems, responsible for system-wide public hospital service
planning and performance, and for determining arrangements for the delivery of public hospital
services within their jurisdiction. The NHRA does not provide the Government with a role or powers
to intervene in state government decisions regarding the organisation and delivery of their health
and hospital systems.
From 2025-26, the Government will invest $19.6 million over three years to expand the number of
Endometriosis and Pelvic Pain Clinics (EPPCs) across Australia and continue service delivery for the
existing EPPCs. Funding will also enable expanded scope of services to include perimenopause and
menopause. The EPPCs deliver improved access to a range of support mechanisms, education, and
assessment from a multidisciplinary team. Evidence received from several existing EPPCs highlights
an increased confidence in providers to successfully establish and deliver comprehensive and holistic
services for women in the community. This will bring the total number of clinics to 33 – amounting
to one in each Primary Health Network (PHN) across the country.
Funding for the additional EPPCs will be implemented through PHNs with priority given to setting up
clinics in locations with greatest need that have been identified through consultation with PHNs and
Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisations (ACCHOs).
The Government has also committed $79.4 million over four years (2023-24 – 2026-27) for PHNs to
commission multidisciplinary team care, as part of the Strengthening Medicare reforms. All PHNs
were eligible to receive this funding to commission allied health professionals, nurses, nurse
practitioners, midwives, and/or Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Workers or Practitioners.
Multidisciplinary care will fill an identified need in each PHN region. Each PHN will determine the
priority for commissioning based on their health needs assessments.
Page 27 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 22
22: The Committee recommends that organisations tasked with improving menopause care utilise
learnings from international best practice.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation, recognising that it is directed towards
organisations tasked with improving menopause care.
To support best practice and to improve menopause care, the Government is investing $2.9 million
over three years from 2025-26 to develop national clinical guidelines for perimenopause and
menopause. National clinical guidelines will ensure information for clinicians is nationally consistent,
evidence based and readily available to support consistent care for women experiencing
perimenopause and menopause.
Page 28 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 23
23: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government investigate improvements to the
collection and use of data to assist with research into the experience of menopause and
perimenopause, and surveillance of the outcomes of the use of MHT.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
The Department of Health and Aged Care Data Strategy 2022-25 outlines the Department of Health
and Aged Care’s commitment to ongoing data quality improvement and data integration activities
for evidence-based policy and programs.
The Commonwealth safely and securely shares health data for public benefit. For example, MBS and
PBS data are integrated in the National Health Data Hub (managed by the Australian Institute of
Health and Welfare (AIHW)) and the Person-Level Integrated Data Asset (PLIDA, managed by the
Australian Bureau of Statistics). These types of data linkages enable approved government and
non-government researchers to analyse patient journeys and to derive whole-of-life insights about
various population groups in Australia, such as the interactions between their characteristics, use of
services like healthcare and education, and outcomes like improved health and employment.
Linked data regarding Menopause Hormonal Therapy (MHT), for example specific PBS and/or MBS
items (if applicable), could support population-level insights regarding MHT use, trends and health
outcomes.
In the 2024–25 Budget the Government provided $5.5 million over three years from 2024–25 for the
AIHW to establish a sexual and reproductive health data set to help inform sexual and reproductive
health policy and improve healthcare access outcomes. Perimenopause and menopause will be a key
priority area in this work program, which will include an extensive consultation process to identify
the information needs and data gaps (including those identified in the Senate Inquiry report), scope
options for improved data collection and commence data development and collection where
applicable. This work will contribute to the evidence base on perimenopause and menopause in
Australia.
To further support research development, the Government has made up to $25 million of funding
over four years from 2024-25 available for the 2024 Medical Research Future Fund (MRFF) Emerging
Priorities and Consumer Driven Research (EPCDR) Infertility, Pregnancy Loss and Menopause Grant
Opportunity which includes a focus on perimenopause and menopause research. The Grant
Opportunity closed on 6 November 2024. Application outcomes are expected by May 2025, with
research projects anticipated to be undertaken from 2025 to 2029.
Page 29 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 24
24: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government task the National Women’s Health
Advisory Council to assist state and territory governments to deliver a National Menopause Action
Plan which considers best practices in menopause care.
The Australian Government supports-in-principle this recommendation.
The National Women’s Health Advisory Council (Council) was established in 2023 to provide
strategic advice and recommendations directly to Government to improve health outcomes for
Australian women and girls. The Council also provides advice on the implementation of the National
Women’s Health Strategy 2020-2030 (Strategy).
The Strategy outlines a national approach to improving health outcomes for all Australian women
and girls, particularly those at greatest risk of poor health, and aims to reduce inequities in health
outcomes. This includes actions to improve the awareness of, and encourage further research and
support services, for menopause.
The Government will consider the feasibility of this recommendation in the context of the Council’s
advisory capacity and in consultation with relevant stakeholders, including state and territory
governments.
Page 30 of 32
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 25
25: The Committee recommends that the Australian Government task the Department of Health and
Aged Care and the Department of Employment and Workplace Relations to monitor international
best practices to ensure Australia is at the forefront of menopause and perimenopause care.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
The Department of Health and Aged Care and the Department of Employment and Workplace
Relations monitor international policies, expert advice and academic publications to inform and
shape its health, employment and workplace relations policy advice to Government, including in
relation to menopause.
Page 31 of 32
OFFICIAL
Coalition Senators Recommendation
The Senate Education and Employment Standing Committee to review the adequacy of existing legal
frameworks, including Section 65 of the Fair Work Act 2009, to ensure women can access flexible
working arrangements during menopause.
The Australian Government notes this recommendation. Decisions on Senate Committee reviews
are a matter for the Senate.
Page 32 of 32
