Australian Government response to the
Senate Select Committee on Job Security reports:
First Interim Report: On-demand platform work in Australia
Second Interim Report: Insecurity in publicly funded jobs
Third Interim Report: Labour hire and contracting
Fourth Interim Report: The job insecurity report
Final Report: Matters of possible privilege
Acknowledgement
The Australian Government would like to thank the Senate Select Committee on Job Security for its
reports into the extent and nature of insecure employment in Australia. The government also
thanks the 231 individuals and organisations who made submissions and those who provided
evidence over 27 public hearings.
Response
The government notes all recommendations made by the committee in its four interim reports and
final report, and the additional recommendations made by Senator Malcolm Roberts in the fourth
interim report (the Reports). Since May 2022, the government has delivered a significant reform
agenda to support secure jobs, better wages and a fairer workplace relations system. Many of these
reforms were informed by the work and evidence of this committee, and implement a substantial
number of its recommendations.
As a result of the passage of time since the Reports were tabled and the significant actions taken by
the government to respond to key issues raised in the Reports, outlined below, a substantive
government response is no longer appropriate.
Outline of reforms relevant to the recommendations of the reports
Workplace relations
The Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Secure Jobs, Better Pay) Act 2022 introduces a suite of
measures to reinvigorate enterprise bargaining.1 A key aim of these reforms was to extend the
benefits of bargaining throughout the workforce, with a particular focus on low-paid sectors. This
Act also places limitations on the use of fixed-term contracts, embeds the principles of job security
and gender equality in the Fair Work Commission’s decision-making processes, and strengthens
protections against discrimination. The Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes) Act
2023 closed the labour hire loophole, criminalised intentional wage theft and improves workplace
safety.2
The Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes No. 2) Act 20243 enables the
Fair Work Commission to hear disputes about unfair contract terms in services contracts, set
minimum standards for employee-like workers and set minimum standards to ensure the road
transport industry is safe, sustainable, and viable. This Act sets a fairer test for determining whether
a person is an independent contractor or an employee. It also introduces an employee right to
disconnect, establishes a fair and objective definition of ‘casual employee’ reflecting the practical
reality of the employment relationship and gives casual employees a clear and simple pathway to
permanency.
1 Explanatory Memorandum, Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Secure Jobs, Better Pay) Bill 2022.
2 Explanatory Memorandum, Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes) Bill 2023.
3 Explanatory Memorandum, Fair Work Legislation Amendment (Closing Loopholes) Bill 2023.
Page 2 of 4
Through Safe Work Australia, the government is also contributing to projects to develop a national
policy approach to workers compensation and the gig economy and ensure the primary duty of
care under work health and safety laws applies effectively to modern work arrangements, including
the gig economy. This work is being progressed through Safe Work Australia’s tripartite processes
involving worker and employer representatives, in addition to state and territory governments.
Care and support workforce
The government is investing in the care and support workforce to make sure we can provide
sustainable, high-quality care and support for Australians. The government has supported the wage
increases determined by the Fair Work Commission in the Aged Care Work Value case and is
delivering $11.3 billion to fund the interim 15% award wage increase in response to the Stage 2
decision of the case. The government has committed to provide a further $3.8 billion to fund
increases outlined in the Stage 3 decision of the case. The government has also committed to a
direct employment preference in aged care and is monitoring of the use of indirect employment by
providers through Quarterly Financial Reporting and the Aged Care Workforce Provider Survey.
The government is committed to building a stronger National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS)
workforce and service provider market to support NDIS participants to achieve their goals and
receive consistent high-quality care. The government is taking actions to support this commitment,
such as through responding to the NDIS Review4 recommendations and the findings of the Royal
Commission into Violence, Abuse, Neglect and Exploitation of People with Disability.5
Higher education
The government is committed to growing secure and better paid jobs in the higher education
sector. Issues of job security in higher education have been considered in consultation with the
sector and stakeholders through the Australian Universities Accord (the Accord). A panel of
eminent Australians led a 12-month review of Australia’s higher education system to drive lasting
and transformational reform in the higher education sector.
The government is acting on the priority actions6 outlined in the Accord Interim Report, which
include working with states and territory governments and universities to strengthen university
governance and improve workplace relations compliance. Education Ministers have established an
Expert Governance Council to develop new ‘University Governance Principles and
Recommendations’ based on 10 priority areas designed to enhance the accountability,
transparency, engagement and representation of university governing bodies. This includes
ensuring rigorous and transparent processes for developing remuneration policies and settings for
senior university staff.
4 Commonwealth of Australia, Working together to deliver the NDIS: Independent Review into the National
Disability Insurance Scheme – Final Report, 2023.
5 Commonwealth of Australia, Australian Government Response to the Disability Royal Commission, 2024.
6 Australian Government Department of Education, Accord Priority Actions, 2023.
Page 3 of 4
On workplace relations, actions include:
• new guidance and reporting requirements from the Tertiary Education Quality and Standards
Agency to ensure higher education providers have governance and management processes in
place to meet enterprise agreements and industrial obligations
• engagement of an independent expert to support the National Tertiary Education Union,
Universities Australia and the Australian Higher Education Industrial Association in identification
and resolution of priority issues to ensure universities are exemplary employers; and
• improved staff data collection by the Department of Education on the use of casual and fixed
term employment arrangements in universities.
Further information on the Accord and the government’s response is available at www.education.
gov.au/australian-universities-accord/accord-202425-budget-and-myefo-measures.
Government employment and procurement
Australian Public Service (APS) reform initiatives are improving core capability and job security in
Commonwealth employment. The Average Staffing Level cap has been abolished and an APS Audit
of Employment has been conducted. Through centralised APS bargaining, common conditions have
reinforced the Public Service Act 1999 principle that the APS is a career-based public service with
ongoing engagement as the usual basis for employment. Consistent with the government’s Secure
Jobs, Better Pay and Closing Loopholes reforms, non-ongoing APS engagement is now limited to a
total term of 18 months where a merit-based process was not undertaken. In addition, the APS has
proactively taken steps to ensure APS casual employees are able to convert to permanent
employment while still ensuring appointments to ongoing APS roles remain based on merit.
The government is also committed to the establishment of a Secure Australian Jobs Code (Secure
Jobs Code) to prioritise secure work in government contracts and ensure that government
purchasing power is being used to support businesses that engage in fair, equitable, ethical, and
sustainable practices. Work to develop the Secure Jobs Code is underway with options for the
scope, design and implementation being considered ahead of consultation with stakeholders and
the public.
The first steps towards a Secure Jobs Code was achieved through the Commonwealth Supplier Code
of Conduct (Supplier Code).7 The Code outlines the Commonwealth’s minimum expectations of
suppliers and their subcontractors while under contract with the Commonwealth. The expectations
in the Code cover ethical behaviour; corporate governance; business practices; and health, safety,
and employee welfare. The Supplier Code came into effect 1 July 2024 and is mandatory for all
Commonwealth contracts.
7 Australian Government Department of Finance, Commonwealth Supplier Code of Conduct, 2024.
Page 4 of 4
