OFFICIAL
Australian Government response to the
Joint Select Committee on Parliamentary
Standards final report
December 2024
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 1
The committee recommends that parliamentary consideration of this report, including
the proposed behaviour standards and codes, should maintain a primary focus on
ensuring that Commonwealth Parliamentary Workplaces are safe and respectful for
everyone who enters them.
This recommendation is directed to the Parliament. The Australian Government supports
this recommendation.
Recommendation 2
The committee recommends the House of Representatives and the Senate adopt the
following Behaviour Standards and Codes (as outlined in Appendix 1 of this report) into
their respective standing orders in the first sitting week after the establishment of
Independent Parliamentary Standards Commission:
• Behaviour Standards for Commonwealth Parliamentary Workplaces; and
• Behaviour Code for Parliamentarians.
The Australian Government agrees this recommendation.
This recommendation was implemented by the Parliament in October 2024 when the
Senate (on 9 October 2024) and the House of Representatives (on 10 October 2024)
approved the Behaviour Standards and Codes with effect from 14 October 2024.
Recommendation 3
The committee recommends the adoption of interim behaviour standards, and therefore
recommends that the House of Representatives adopt the following resolution:
• that the Australian Parliament endorses the draft Behaviour Standards and Codes
as presented in the Joint Select Committee on Parliamentary Standards’ final
report, pending the establishment of the advisory and enforcement regime, and
the final enactment of Behaviour Standards and Codes for parliamentarians,
parliamentarians’ staff and Commonwealth Parliamentary Workplaces; and
• that a message be forwarded to the Senate for its concurrence.
The Australian Government agrees this recommendation.
This recommendation was implemented by the Parliament in February 2023 when the
Senate (on 8 February 2023) and the House of Representatives (on 9 February 2023)
endorsed the draft Behaviour Standards and Codes.
1
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 4
The committee recommends that the Behaviour Code for Parliamentarians’ Staff is
formalised through employment-related mechanisms.
The Australian Government agrees this recommendation.
This recommendation was implemented on 9 October 2024 when the Special Minister of
State determined, under subsection 13(2) of the Members of Parliament (Staff) Act 1984
(MOPS Act), that from 14 October 2024, MOPS Act employees must adhere to the
Behaviour Code for staff employed under the Members of Parliament (Staff) Act 1984.
Recommendation 5
The committee supports the recommendation to establish an Independent Parliamentary
Standards Commission as proposed in the Australian Human Rights Commission’s Set the
Standard: Report on the Independent Review into the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Workplaces (2021).
The Australian Government agrees this recommendation.
This recommendation was implemented by the establishment of the Independent
Parliamentary Standards Commission on 14 October 2024.
Recommendation 6
The committee recommends that in establishing the Independent Parliamentary
Standards Commission, the Australian Government and the Parliament legislate a range
of sanctions including, but not limited to, those proposed in the Australian Human Rights
Commission’s Set the Standard: Report on the Independent Review into the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Workplaces (2021).
The Australian Government agrees this recommendation.
A range of sanctions have been legislated in the Parliamentary Workplace Support Service
Act 2023 as amended by the Parliamentary Workplace Support Service Amendment
(Independent Parliamentary Standards Commission) Act 2024 in relation to breaches of the
Behaviour Standards and Codes to be imposed by, or on recommendation of, the
Independent Parliamentary Standards Commission.
Recommendation 7
The committee recommends further development of guidance material by the proposed
Independent Parliamentary Standards Commission to provide a clear understanding of
the extent of:
• the official role of a parliamentarian that will be subject to the Behaviour
Standards and Codes; and
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
• the official role of a parliamentarian’s staff that will be subject to the Behaviour
Standards and Codes.
The Australian Government agrees this recommendation.
The Parliamentary Workplace Support Service and the Independent Parliamentary
Standards Commission are developing this guidance noting, the acting Chair Commissioner
provided initial guidance to parliamentarians and MOPS Act employees in November 2024.
Recommendation 8
The committee supports the recommendation of the Department of the Prime Minister
and Cabinet to clarify the obligations of parliamentarians as employers in the Members of
Parliament (Staff) Act 1984.
The Australian Government agrees this recommendation.
The Members of Parliament (Staff) Amendment Act 2023 amended the Members of
Parliament (Staff) Act 1984 to implement certain recommendations of the review by the
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet in relation to that Act’s employment
framework. This included clarifying the roles of parliamentarians and office-holders,
including by expressly providing that parliamentarians and office holders are responsible for
the day-to-day management of their employees.
Recommendation 9
The committee recommends the formation of a staff and staff representative
consultation group that remains engaged in the further development and implementation
of these Behaviour Standards and codes – including subsequent guidance materials,
education and training, evaluations and reviews. This consultation group should also be
engaged in the establishment of the entities responsible for enforcement and workplace
policies.
This recommendation is directed to the Parliament. The Australian Government supports
this recommendation.
As per the report, the draft Behaviour Codes and Standards were developed based on
consultation, including with staff. The Parliamentary Leadership Taskforce established a
staff consultation group to engage with staff across different Commonwealth parliamentary
workplaces on the implementation of the Set the Standard reforms, including on the
Independent Parliamentary Standards Commission.
The Parliamentary Workplace Support Service Act 2023 as amended by the Parliamentary
Workplace Support Service Amendment (Independent Parliamentary Standards Commission)
Act 2024 provided for the establishment of the Parliamentary Joint Committee on
Parliamentary Standards. The Parliamentary Joint Committee on Parliamentary Standards
has a function to review the Behaviour Standards and Codes once every new parliament and
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
at any other time it resolves to do so. As set out in the Explanatory Memorandum, while it
would be a matter for the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Parliamentary Standards on
how it conducts a review of the Behaviour Codes, it would be expected the Committee
would consult with stakeholders, including staff, affected by the Codes to ensure they are fit
for purpose.
The Parliamentary Workplace Support Service Act 2023 also provided for the establishment
of the PWSS Consultative Committee that will be consulted on these matters following its
formation.
The Parliamentary Workplace Support Service is supported by a Work Health and Safety
(WHS) Committee which facilitates consultation between PWSS, Finance, and MOP(S) Act
employees. The Committee includes union and management representatives and
workgroups are based on party lines.
Recommendation 10
a. The committee recommends that the Australian Government and the Parliament
give consideration to the appropriate entity and framework to conduct a review of
the Behavioural Standards and Codes, and the advisory and enforcement
mechanisms. The committee recommends that the initial review is conducted one
to two years after the establishment of the proposed Independent Parliamentary
Standards Commission and the adoption of the Behaviour Standards and Codes.
The committee recommends that subsequent reviews are conducted once every
new Parliament.
b. The committee also recommends that the Australian Government and Parliament
commence a process to develop integrity and ethical obligations and consider how
these may be incorporated with the Behavioural Standards and Codes.
This recommendation is directed jointly to the Parliament and the Australian Government.
The Australian Government supports this recommendation.
In relation to recommendation 10(a), the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Parliamentary
Standards will provide parliamentary oversight of the Independent Parliamentary Standards
Commission. The Parliamentary Joint Committee on Parliamentary Standards has a function
to review the Behaviour Standards and Codes once every new parliament and at any other
time it resolves to do so.
In relation to recommendation 10(b), the Australian Government supports the
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Parliamentary Standards examining integrity and ethical
obligations and how these may be incorporated with the Behaviour Standards and Codes.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 11
The committee recommends that the Parliament should determine the appropriate role
of a future Joint Standing Committee on Parliamentary Standards, as part of the
establishment of the proposed Independent Parliamentary Standards Commission.
The Australian Government agrees this recommendation.
The Parliamentary Workplace Support Service Act 2023 as amended by the Parliamentary
Workplace Support Service Amendment (Independent Parliamentary Standards Commission)
Act 2024, establishes the Parliamentary Joint Committee on Parliamentary Standards to
provide parliamentary oversight of the Independent Parliamentary Standards Commission.
Recommendation 12
The committee recommends early consultation between the presiding officers, relevant
privileges committees and the Independent Parliamentary Standards Commission, when
established, to consider issues related to the intersection of the behaviour Standards and
Codes and parliamentary privilege.
The Australian Government agrees this recommendation.
The Parliamentary Workplace Support Service Act 2023 as amended by the Parliamentary
Workplace Support Service Amendment (Independent Parliamentary Standards Commission)
Act 2024, expressly provides that an Independent Parliamentary Standards Commission
Commissioner can confer with a Presiding Officer (or a person authorised by a Presiding
Officer, such as a Clerk) to assist with determining whether conduct forms part of
proceedings in the Parliament (i.e. conduct that engages parliamentary privilege).
Recommendation 13
The committee recommends that guidance material on the Behaviour Standards and
Codes should be developed by the proposed entity responsible for workplace policies and
made available when the Behaviour Standards and Codes and enforcement regime come
into effect.
• Guidance material should include definitions and examples of prohibited
behaviours and should be drafted into consultation with impacted groups within
the parliamentary community.
The Australian Government agrees this recommendation.
The Parliamentary Workplace Support Service Act 2023 gives the Parliamentary Workplace
Support Service a function to provide education on, and to inform Commonwealth
Parliamentary Workplace participants about the Behaviour Standards and Codes, noting the
Parliamentary Workplace Support Service commenced its education program on the
Behaviour Standards and Codes in September 2024.
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
Recommendation 14
The committee recommends that guidance material and policies on vexatious, frivolous
and unreasonable complaints in relation to the Behaviour Standards and Codes are
developed in conjunction with the Parliamentary Workplace Support Service. These
materials should also be made available in the same way as other policies.
The Australian Government agrees this recommendation, noting the response to
recommendation 13 above.
The Parliamentary Workplace Support Service is developing guidance in consultation with
the Independent Parliamentary Standards Commission.
Recommendation 15
The committee recommends that the supporting material to be developed by the
proposed entity responsible for workplace policies, include a one-page document similar
to Appendix 2. The document can be displayed alongside the Behaviour Standards in
Commonwealth Parliamentary Workplaces. It should explain what each of the standards
means and why they are important.
The Australian Government agrees this recommendation.
The Australian Government notes the Parliamentary Workplace Support Service is
developing the information in this recommendation.
Recommendation 16
The committee recommends a proactive approach to education and training when
implementing the behaviour codes. This training should reflect best practice, be
accessible to all and be properly resourced. Training on safe and respectful workplace
behaviour and the Behaviour Standards and Codes should be mandatory as should the
transparent reporting of parliamentarian and staff participation. In addition,
parliamentarians should be provided with mandatory training in people management and
inclusive leadership, including anti-racism, disability discrimination and First Nations
cultural awareness.
The Australian Government agrees this recommendation.
The Parliamentary Workplace Support Service Act 2023 gives the Parliamentary Workplace
Support Service a function to provide education on, and to inform Commonwealth
parliamentary workplace participants about the Behaviour Standards and Codes. As noted
at recommendation 13, the Parliamentary Workplace Support Service commenced its
education program on the Behaviour Standards and Codes in September 2024.
The Parliamentary Workplace Support Service’s education and training function also covers
the functions of the Parliamentary Workplace Support Service, work health and safety
matters that arise in connection with the duties of parliamentarians and their staff, and
OFFICIAL
OFFICIAL
other matters relating to the employment of staff under the Members of Parliament (Staff)
Act 1984 and maintaining safe and respectful workplaces.
The Parliamentary Workplace Support Service Chief Executive Officer may, by legislative
instrument, determine a specified education or training program for parliamentarians and
their staff is mandatory where certain conditions set out in the legislation are met.
OFFICIAL
