Australian Government response to the Senate
Standing Committees on Environment and
Communications Legislation Committee report:
Interactive Gambling Amendment (Credit and Other
Measures) Bill 2023 [Provisions]
February 2025
Overview
The Australian Government is committed to online gambling taking place under a robust legislative
framework with strong consumer protections.
The Australian Government welcomes the report by the Senate Standing Committees on
Environment and Communications Legislation Committee (the committee) into the Interactive
Gambling Amendment (Credit and Other Measures) Bill 2023 [provisions], which was tabled on
12 October 2023.
The Interactive Gambling Amendment (Credit and Other Measures) Act 2023 passed the Parliament
on 6 December 2023, and commenced in full on 11 June 2024. The legislation amends the
Interactive Gambling Act 2001 (the IGA) to prohibit the use of credit cards, credit-related products
and digital currency as payment methods for interactive wagering services. The ban does not
capture lottery services, which, together with keno-type lotteries, are not included in the definition
of ‘wagering services’ (betting on racing and sports) under the IGA.
The Government also legislated to provide the Australian Communications and Media Authority with
enforceable undertakings and remedial directions powers to enforce the credit card prohibition and
other online gambling offences.
The ban is consistent with the Government’s online gambling harm reduction initiatives, including:
• Implementing monthly activity statements so Australians who gamble online can clearly see
their wins and losses each month;
• Requiring all staff who work in online gambling companies to have appropriate training to
create a culture of safer gambling;
• Introducing new evidence-based taglines with stronger messages about the risks and harms
of online gambling;
• Strengthening classification of gambling-like features in video games to better protect
children;
• Establishing mandatory pre-verification to prevent children and people who have self-
excluded to place an online bet; and
• Launching the National Self-Exclusion Register (BetStop), which has been used by more than
37,000 Australians (as at January 2025), with 40% of those opting for self-imposed lifetime
bans.
Australian Government response
The Australian Government’s response to the committee’s report is set out in detail below.
Recommendation 2:
2.64 The committee recommends that the Minister for Communications undertake a review over
the next 12 months into the regulation of keno-type lotteries under the Interactive Gambling
Act 2001. The review should consider the potential for how credit and digital payment bans
and other harm reduction policies may be applied to keno-type lotteries.
The Government supports this recommendation.
The Australian Government, through the Department of Infrastructure, Transport, Regional
Development, Communications and the Arts (the department) commenced a review into the
regulation of online keno under the IGA on 15 July 2024.
Online keno is a game of chance, drawn every 3 minutes that offers players the opportunity to win
prizes by selecting numbers and matching them with the drawn numbers. It is considered to be a
type of lottery under the IGA.
The department also used the opportunity to seek feedback from stakeholders on the regulation of
another emerging online lottery service under the IGA – foreign matched lotteries – which allows
Australians to access international lottery draws, when they would otherwise be ineligible to do so.
These overseas lotteries offer large jackpots, sometimes worth hundreds of millions of dollars.
Foreign matched lotteries, along with some online keno products are currently promoted to
Australians via a variety of mediums including direct marketing (e.g. emails), out of home (e.g.
billboards), television, radio, social media, sporting ground advertising and sports sponsorship.
The review included targeted consultation with stakeholders from the wagering, lottery and harm
minimisation advocates, community and charity peak bodies, academics, states and territories and
Commonwealth agencies.
Stakeholders were asked to provide feedback to a series of questions, including whether the current
definition of an ‘excluded lottery service’ under the IGA is fit for purpose, and whether harm
reduction policy options, including credit and digital payment bans, or other restrictions, should be
applied to these types of online lottery products.
The review has been completed, and the Government will consider the final recommendations.
