Australian Government response to the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works
report:
Report 3 2020 - National Education Centre for the Great
Barrier Reef, Reef HQ
JANUARY 2023
Introduction
The Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority (the Authority) sought approval from the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works (the Committee) to proceed with
proposed critical safety works for the continued safe operation of the National Education
Centre for the Great Barrier Reef, Reef HQ. These works were announced in December
2019 as part of the Mid-Year-Economic-Forecast Outlook budget process.
The aim of the project is to ‘address a backlog of Reef HQ asset replacement and
management. The works are directed to address the existing structural, mechanical and
electrical safety risks. The project also aims to ensure that the Authority meets its duty of
care for both staff and visitors’.
The estimated cost of the project is $26.9 million (excluding GST).
The project was referred to the Committee on 19 February 2020. A virtual site inspection
followed by a public hearing occurred on 21 May 2020.
Response
Recommendation 3
The Committee recommends that Reef HQ is provided with additional funding for the
purposes of updating its exhibits and technology to enable it to maintain its excellence in
education and research, and tourism.
Response
Noted
Since the Committee’s recommendation, Reef HQ received a further $53.2 million to
transform the aquarium into a global centre of excellence in tropical coral reef education.
Recommendation 4
The Committee recommends that the House of Representatives resolve, pursuant to
Section 18(7) of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, that it is expedient to carry out the
following proposed works: Critical safety works for the continued safe operation of the
National Education Centre for the Great Barrier Reef, Reef HQ.
Response
Agreed
Since the Committee’s recommendation, an approach to market occurred and a Principal
Contractor appointed in September 2021.
