Australian Government response to the
Independent National Security Legislation Monitor report:
Review into the operation of Part 3, Division 1 of the
National Security Information (Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004
as it applies in the Alan Johns matter
January 2023
Page 1 of 4
The Australian Government agrees with the recommendations of the Independent National
Security Legislation Monitor (INSLM) in his report, Review into the operation of Part 3,
Division 1 of the National Security Information (Criminal and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004 as
it applies in the Alan Johns matter (Report).
The Government will consider legislative options to implement the recommendations in light
of the INSLM’s broader review of the whole of the National Security Information (Criminal
and Civil Proceedings) Act 2004 (NSI Act) (due to be completed by 31 October 2023). In the
interim, the Government will consider establishing processes to give effect to the
recommendations’ intent without legislative change.
Recommendation Government response
Recommendation 1 The Government agrees with this
recommendation.
Where closed court orders are sought from
any court under s 22, the Attorney-General The Government supports the making of
be required to make submissions to the court submissions on closed court orders sought
to explain why such orders are appropriate under s 22 having regard to the
and should be made having regard to the circumstances of each case, noting it is a
object of the NSI Act and the deeply rooted matter for the court’s discretion whether it
common law tradition of the open court. receives submissions.
The Government will consider legislative
options to implement this recommendation in
light of the INSLM’s broader review of the
NSI Act, including options to amend the
National Security Information (Criminal and
Civil Proceedings) Regulation 2015 (NSI
Regulation) or the Legal Services Directions
2017 (Directions) as proposed by the
INSLM.
Until that broader review is completed, the
Government will offer to make submissions
to the court when seeking s 22 closed court
orders in a proceeding.
Recommendation 2 The Government agrees with the first
formulation of this recommendation.
Section 22 be amended to express that, where
closed court orders are sought under s 22, the The Government supports explicitly
court has power to appoint a contradictor to recognising the court’s inherent power to
make submissions to the court on such exercise its discretion to appoint a
orders. contradictor where closed court orders are
sought under s 22 of the NSI Act.
Alternatively, s 22 be amended to express
that, where any orders under s 22 are sought, The Government will consider legislative
the court has the power to appoint a options to implement this recommendation in
contradictor to make submissions to the court light of the INSLM’s broader review of the
on such orders. NSI Act, including options to amend the NSI
Page 2 of 4
Act, the NSI Regulation or the Directions, as
proposed by the INSLM.
Until that broader review is completed, the
Government will, where appropriate, offer to
make submissions to the court on the court’s
inherent power to appoint a contradictor,
when seeking s 22 closed court orders in a
proceeding.
Recommendation 3A The Government agrees with this
recommendation.
That orders made under s 22 of the NSI Act
be made publicly available. The Government considers that the
administration of justice would be enhanced
by making s 22 orders publicly available,
noting that the appropriate timing and extent
of publication may vary according to the
circumstances of a particular case.
The Government will consider what
legislative changes may be needed to
facilitate public access to s 22 orders in light
of the INSLM’s broader review of the NSI
Act.
The Government will consult with relevant
stakeholders, including the courts, to develop
options to facilitate public access to s 22
orders.
Recommendation 3B The Government agrees with this
recommendation.
That s 47 be amended to add to the matters to
be reported: The Government supports increased
transparency of the number of legal
i. within the year, the federal criminal proceedings in which the NSI Act has been
proceedings in which s 22 orders invoked.
were made
The Government will consider amendments
ii. within the year, the federal criminal to s 47 to implement this recommendation, in
proceedings in which a judicial light of the INSLM’s broader review of the
officer required the appointment of NSI Act.
a contradictor before making or
refusing a s22 order Until that broader review is completed and
any legislative amendments are made, the
iii. if these earlier matters cannot be Government proposes to incorporate
detailed because of orders of a additional data in future NSI Act annual
court, the number of federal reports on the number of proceedings in
criminal proceedings where such which the NSI Act has been invoked during
orders have been made the financial year, commencing with the
annual report for 2021/22.
Page 3 of 4
iv. within the year, the federal criminal
proceedings in which orders that
had in earlier years been made
under s 22 ceased to operate
v. the total number of federal criminal
proceedings in which orders
pursuant to s 22 continued to
operate.
Recommendation 4 The Government agrees with this
recommendation.
Where closed court orders are sought from
any court under s 22, the Attorney-General The Government supports the
be required to seek that reasons be given and Attorney-General seeking that reasons be
published. given and published where closed court
orders are sought under s 22, having regard
to the circumstances of each case and noting
the giving of reasons is ultimately a matter
for the court’s discretion.
The Government will consider legislative
options to implement this recommendation in
light of the INSLM’s broader review of the
NSI Act, including options to amend the NSI
Regulation or the Directions, as proposed by
the INSLM.
Until that broader review is completed, the
Government will ask that the court consider
giving and publishing reasons for s 22 closed
court orders made in a proceeding.
Page 4 of 4
