Australian Government response to the
Senate Legal and Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee report:
Anti-Discrimination and Human Rights Legislation Amendment
(Respect at Work) Bill 2022 [Provisions]
JANUARY 2023
Introduction
The Australian Government welcomes the opportunity to respond to the Senate Legal and
Constitutional Affairs Legislation Committee’s report, Anti-Discrimination and Human Rights
Legislation Amendment (Respect at Work) Bill 2022 [Provisions] (Committee Report) tabled
on 3 November 2022.
The Anti-Discrimination and Human Rights Legislation Amendment (Respect at Work) Act
2022 (the Act) received Royal Assent on 12 December 2022. The Act implements outstanding
legislative recommendations from the Respect@Work: National Inquiry into Sexual
Harassment in Australian Workplaces (Respect@Work Report). In doing so, the Act
strengthens the legal and regulatory frameworks relating to sexual harassment, and expands
the role of the Australian Human Rights Commission (the Commission) in preventing sexual
harassment and other forms of sex discrimination. The Government has committed to
implementing all 55 Respect@Work recommendations in full.
The Australian Government’s response to the report is set out below. The response
addresses the recommendations contained in the report and in the additional comments.
Recommendations
Recommendation 1: The committee recommends that, six to 12 months after Royal Assent,
the Attorney-General refers to the Australian Law Reform Commission an inquiry into the
operation of the cost provisions proposed in the Bill, including a focus on public interest
litigation under those provisions.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government carefully considered this recommendation and listened to stakeholder
concerns in relation to the cost protection provisions originally in the Bill, which were
based on a recommendation of the Australian Human Rights Commission. As a result of
these considerations the Government moved amendments to remove the cost protection
provisions from the Bill.
The Government has referred the issue of costs in discrimination proceedings to the
Attorney-General’s Department for review. That review will begin immediately and be
completed in May 2023. The Government intends to legislate the costs model
recommended by that review as quickly as possible.
Recommendation 2: The committee recommends that the Bill be passed.
The Government supports this recommendation.
The Act received Royal Assent on 12 December 2022.
Additional comments by Senator Paul Scarr
Recommendation 1: The wording of proposed section 28M be reconsidered to address the
concerns raised by key stakeholders
The Government does not support this recommendation.
Section 28M of the Act implements recommendation 16(c) of the Respect@Work Report
and is informed by existing case law.
Recommendation 2: The phrase: ‘as far as possible’ in proposed subsection 47C(1) be
replaced with: ‘so far as reasonably practicable’.
The Government does not support this recommendation.
This proposal would depart from the language of recommendation 17 of the
Respect@Work Report, which was based on the Victorian positive duty (section 15 of the
Victorian Equal Opportunity Act 2010). The Government committed to the full
implementation of the Respect@Work Report recommendations.
Recommendation 3: Given the benefit in separating the conciliation and enforcement roles
of the AHRC, and the existing organisational capacity of the Fair Work Ombudsman
throughout Australia, it is recommended that consideration be given to whether the
compliance and enforcement function would be better carried out by the Fair Work
Ombudsman with expert support from the AHRC.
The Government does not support this recommendation.
The recommendation is not consistent with the Respect@Work Report. The Government
supports the full implementation of the Respect@Work Report recommendations.
The protections in the Act are grounded in human rights law, based on Australia’s
international human rights law obligations. The Commission is best placed to enforce
these protections, having the experience and expertise in human rights and
anti-discrimination law.
The Fair Work Ombudsman, as Australia’s workplace relations regulator, has its own
separate role in ensuring compliance with the prohibition on sexual harassment under the
Fair Work Act 2009 (Fair Work Act). It is outside of the scope of the Fair Work Act and the
Fair Work Ombudsman’s role for it to be regulating and enforcing anti-discrimination law
in the human rights framework.
There are multiple frameworks that persons subject to sexual harassment or related
unlawful conduct can access to seek redress. It is beneficial to provide people with the
flexibility to choose the most appropriate avenue depending on their circumstances. The
Government’s main priority, reflecting the findings of the Respect@Work Report, is to
ensure these frameworks are aligned to the greatest extent possible. The Respect@Work
Council also provides a mechanism for the Australian Human Rights Commission and the
Fair Work Ombudsman to work together to improve coordination, consistency and clarity
across the various frameworks.
Recommendation 4: It is further recommended that the AHRC dedicate extensive resources
and capability to developing (in close consultation with relevant stakeholders) detailed
guidelines for employers and PCBUs as to how they can discharge the positive duty arising
under proposed subsection 47C(1), including guidelines specific for particular industries and
workplace environments.
The Government notes this recommendation.
Section 35A of the Act already confers specific functions on the Commission to prepare
and publish guidelines for complying with the positive duty. These guidelines will be a
valuable compliance mechanism in assisting duty holders to understand the nature of
their obligations under the positive duty, and the measures they must take to achieve
compliance. The Commission has expertise and experience in delivering such guidelines
as its section 35A functions mirror its existing functions in relation to unlawful
discrimination and human rights.
In the 2022-23 Budget, the Government invested $5.8 million in funding, over four years,
to enable the Commission to educate employers about the positive duty and enforce
compliance once it is introduced.
The form and content of the guidelines will be a matter for the Commission.
Recommendation 5: Further consideration be given to the appropriate costs allocation
principles to avoid unintended consequences
The Government supports this recommendation.
The Government carefully considered the Committee’s report and listened to stakeholder
concerns in relation to the cost protection provisions originally in the Bill, which were
based on a recommendation of the Australian Human Rights Commission. As a result of
these considerations the Government moved amendments to remove the cost protection
provisions from the Bill.
The Government has referred the issue of costs in discrimination proceedings to the
Attorney-General’s Department for review. That review will begin immediately and be
completed in May 2023. The Government intends to legislate the costs model
recommended by that review as quickly as possible.
Additional comments by the Australian Greens
Recommendation 1:
(a) Require employers to take ‘all reasonable steps’ to eliminate discrimination and
harassment
The Government does not support this recommendation.
This proposal would depart from the language of recommendation 17 of the
Respect@Work Report, which was based on the Victorian positive duty (section 15 of the
Victorian Equal Opportunity Act 2010). The Government committed to the full
implementation of the Respect@Work Report recommendations.
(b) Include consultation with employees and compliance with AHRC guidelines as relevant
factors under s 47C(6)
The Government does not support this recommendation.
The guidelines produced by the Commission under paragraph 35A(a) will inform their
assessment of compliance with the positive duty. Furthermore, any requirement for
employers to engage with their workers as part of complying with the positive duty is a
matter for the Commission and the guidance they produce on compliance with the
positive duty. Notably, the positive duty provision already enables ‘any relevant matter’
to be taken into account when considering compliance with the positive duty (see
paragraph 47C(6)(d)).
(c) Authorise the AHRC to publish compliance notices
The Government does not support this recommendation.
When issuing a compliance notice, the Commission is required to set out the specific
action that the person must take, or refrain from taking, in order to address the failure
(see section 35F). Compliance notices will remain confidential at the initial stage to
provide employers with a reasonable opportunity to rectify their actions and achieve
compliance. If a person fails to comply with the compliance notice and the President of
the Commission applies to the federal courts for an order to enforce compliance with the
notice, the fact of the notice will be made public at that stage through the court process.
These provisions reflect the fact that the primary purpose of the compliance regime is not
to name and shame employers for non-compliance but to lift standards and achieve
cultural change to create safer, more respectful workplaces.
Recommendation 2:
Amend the hostile workplace environment provisions in s 28M to:
(a) remove the requirement for a person to ‘subject another person’ to a hostile work
environment, and instead make it unlawful for a person to contribute to the
maintenance of a workplace environment that is hostile
The Government does not support this recommendation.
A person’s conduct does not need to be directed or targeted towards a specific person to
be unlawful under section 28M. The primary difference between a hostile workplace
environment and other forms of unlawful conduct, such as sexual harassment, is that the
conduct is not necessarily directed towards a particular person, but results in a generally
hostile environment for that person (and others).
(b) apply to conduct that makes a workplace hostile on the grounds of any protected
attribute under the Sex Discrimination Act 1984
The Government does not support this recommendation.
Section 28M prohibits conduct that results in a hostile workplace environment on the
ground of sex, consistent with recommendation 16(c) of the Respect@Work Report.
(c) include intersectional factors such as age, sexual orientation, gender identity, race,
religious belief and disability as considerations in determining whether a hostile
workplace environment has been maintained
The Government does not support this recommendation.
This amendment is unnecessary. Subsection 28M(3) of the Act already provides that any
relevant circumstance may be taken into account for the purposes of determining
whether a person has subjected another person to a workplace environment that is
hostile on the ground of sex.
Recommendation 3:
(a) Apply the positive duty and hostile work environment provisions to preventing any form
of unlawful discrimination
The Government does not support this recommendation.
The scope of the positive duty in the Act is consistent with, and implements,
recommendation 17 of the Respect@Work Report.
Similarly, the scope of section 28M is consistent with, and implements, recommendation
16(c) of the Respect@Work Report.
(b) Amend the objects clause in the Sex Discrimination Act 1984 to reflect gender neutrality
and intersectionality
The Government does not support this recommendation.
The objects clause in the Act is consistent with, and implements, recommendation 16(a)
of the Respect@Work Report.
Recommendation 4: Amend s 46PSA to adopt an ‘equal access’ approach to costs protection
for complaints.
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government carefully considered the Committee’s report and listened to stakeholder
concerns in relation to the cost protection provisions originally in the Bill, which were
based on a recommendation of the Australian Human Rights Commission. As a result of
these considerations the Government moved amendments to remove the cost protection
provisions from the bill.
The Government has referred the issue of costs in discrimination proceedings to the
Attorney-General’s Department for review. That review will begin immediately and be
completed in May 2023. The Government intends to legislate the costs model
recommended by that review as quickly as possible.
Recommendation 5:
(a) Extend WGEA reporting obligations to all organisations with 50 or more employees
The Government does not support this recommendation.
This recommendation goes beyond the scope of the Respect@Work Report. The Act
requires Commonwealth public sector agencies with 100 or more employees to comply
with the Workplace Gender Equality Agency’s (WGEA) reporting requirements. This is
consistent with the existing requirements for private sector organisations.
(b) Amend WGEA reporting obligations to require relevant organisations to report on the
steps they have taken to meet their positive duty, the number of sexual harassment and
discrimination claims made, the number of claims resolved, and whether the
organisation uses non-disclosure agreements.
The Government does not support this recommendation.
The Government is focussed on ensuring alignment with the recommendations in the
Respect@Work Report and notes that this recommendation goes beyond the scope of
the Report. The Workplace Gender Equality Act 2012 (WGE Act) already requires private
sector businesses with 100 or more employees to report to the WGEA on their gender
equality indicators. This Act brings the Commonwealth public sector in line with the
reporting obligations of the private sector. Gender Equality Indicator 6 (sex-based
harassment and discrimination), covers a range of matters that employers already report
to WGEA on, including prevention policies, grievance processes and training relating to
sex-based harassment and discrimination.
Furthermore, pursuant to recommendation 42 of the Respect@Work Report, WGEA is
working with the Respect@Work Council to consider how good practice indicators for
measuring and monitoring sexual harassment prevalence, prevention and response may
apply to reporting in relation to sexual harassment under the WGEA Act. Some of these
indicators are expected to cover employer activities/practices relating to risk assessment,
processes for reporting, and supports for employees.
Recommendation 6:
(a) Regularly review AHRC funding to ensure adequate resources are available for
education, support, monitoring and enforcement
The Government supports this recommendation.
The Government is providing $10.5 million to the Commission over four years to support
implementation of key Respect@Work recommendations. This includes $5.8 million to
educate employers about the positive duty and assess and enforce compliance once the
legislation has commenced.
(b) Support the extension of the existing network of independent Working Women’s
Centres across Australia, including a national body to coordinate the roll out
The Government notes this recommendation.
The Government is providing $8 million per year ongoing to ensure there are properly
funded working women’s centres in every Australian state and territory.
The Government is undertaking targeted consultation with working women’s centres,
state and territory governments and other key stakeholders to help inform the
development of an effective new governance and funding model for the delivery of
services across Australia.
Recommendation 7: Include a requirement for a statutory review of the operation of the
Bill within 12 - 18 months of the commencement of enforcement provisions, and then every
five years.
The Government supports this recommendation in principle.
During the debate on the Bill, the Government supported the amendment moved by the
Jacqui Lambie Network and the Australian Greens in the Senate to require a statutory
review of the amendments made by the Act. The review is required to commence as soon
as practicable after 2 years of the last amendments in the Act commencing (being the
positive duty compliance functions of the Commission) and before 3 years of their
commencement. The review would need to be completed within a period of 9 months.
A statutory review is an important mechanism to ensure that the Act is operating as
intended, and the Commission is able to fulfil its functions, as provided in the Act.
