Australian Government response to the
Joint Standing Committee on the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) report:

Current Scheme Implementation and Forecasting for the NDIS

February 2023

Introduction

The Australian Government welcomes the Joint Standing Committee on the National Disability
Insurance Scheme’s (the Committee’s) second report in the 46" Parliament on Current Scheme
Implementation and Forecasting for the National Disability Insurance Scheme (the report).

The report looks at new evidence and issues raised since the tabling of the Current Scheme
Implementation and Forecasting for the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS, the
scheme) Interim Report on 30 November 2021. The report makes six recommendations.
Three of these relate to topics that should be researched, two relate to the dissemination of
research, and one relates to how scheme sustainability is measured by the National Disability
Insurance Agency (NDIA).

The Australian Government supports each of the six recommendations made in the Committee’s
report. The Australian Government also agrees with the Committee in noting the importance of
rebuilding trust between the disability community and the NDIS.

The Australian Government is committed to improving the NDIS. The Australian Government
is placing a stronger focus on improving the scheme’s effectiveness and securing outcomes for
participants. Central to this will be meaningful engagement with people with disability, carers,
representative organisations, providers, and state and territory governments to improve the
scheme.

The Australian Government is committed to transparency and recognises that openness and
accountability are critical to rebuilding trust between the NDIS and the disability community.
The NDIA regularly publishes data so the scheme can be properly monitored, evaluated, and
interrogated, and in order to identify gaps in the current evidence base so more information, data
and research can be gathered. The Australian Government recognises that the way in which data
and information is released can always be improved, and the NDIA is already working on ways
to ensure information published about the scheme is accessible to the broadest possible audience.

To this end, the Australian Government, with the state and territories, is undertaking an
independent review of the NDIS (the NDIS Review). The first part of the NDIS Review will
look at the design, operations and sustainability of the NDIS. The second part will look at ways
to make the market and workforce more responsive, supportive and sustainable. The NDIS
Review will consider all available evidence and look at benefits as well as challenges inside
and outside the NDIS. The NDIS Review findings will guide the priority areas for improving
the scheme.

The following pages provide the Australian Government response to each of the
recommendations.

Inquiry into the Joint Standing Committee on the National Disability
Insurance Scheme (NDIS) report: Current Scheme Implementation and
Forecasting for the NDIS

Recommendations made by the Committee

. Thecommittee recommends that the Australian Government, through the National
Disability Insurance Agency or another appropriate body, commission
independent research into:

e the extent and adequacy of support for people with disability outside the
National Disability Insurance Scheme

e best practice early intervention, including supports for children not
eligible for the scheme

e effective market stewardship; and

interfaces with mainstream services.

Supported

To ensure equitable access and the right support for adults and children with disability,
the Australian Government is committed to commissioning quality research that is effectively
translated into policy and in delivery settings and is consistent with Australia’s Disability
Strategy 2021-2031.

The topics proposed by the Committee in this recommendation may be considered in the NDIS
Review, research and evaluation projects undertaken by the NDIA, and/or the National
Disability Research Partnership (NDRP). The NDRP is to be an independent national research
and knowledge translation hub for the disability sector, which once fully established, will
facilitate a collaborative and inclusive research agenda through partnerships between
academics, people with disability, their families, carers and supporters, service providers and
governments.

2. The committee recommends that, as part of its ongoing work to understand National
Disability Insurance Scheme costs, Disability Ministers, through the Disability
Reform Ministers' Meetings, commission independent research in the following
areas:

e the drivers underpinning growth in participant numbers

e the underlying causes of projected increases of the cost of plans

e the impact of National Disability Insurance Agency management
approaches; and

e the effectiveness of current capacity building supports.

Supported

The Australian Government is committed to ensuring solutions to problems with the design
and operation of the scheme are evidence based. It is important to measure more than just
outputs and costs and place a stronger emphasis on understanding outcomes for participants to
ensure the scheme is genuinely improving the lives of Australians with disability and their
families and carers.

The Australian Government notes that the NDIS Review will consider all available evidence
and look at benefits as well as ways to address challenges. The NDIS Review findings will
guide Disability Reform Ministers on priority areas for further research and reform, which will
include meaningful engagement of people with disability, carers, representative organisations,
providers, and other stakeholders.


3. The committee recommends that all commissioned independent research into the
National Disability Insurance Scheme should, to the greatest extent possible, be
published in full.

4. The committee recommends that the National Disability Insurance Agency or other
relevant government body commission independent accessible translations or easy-
read versions of all published independent research into the National Disability
Insurance Scheme.

Supported

The Australian Government is committed to improving transparency to rebuild trust between
the NDIS and people it supports. The Australian Government is committed to publishing
independent research into the NDIS and ensuring all published independent research includes
independently developed accessible translations or Easy Read versions, where practical.

An important principle is that it is incumbent on all entities undertaking research into the NDIS
to ensure outcomes of their research are published to the fullest extent possible in formats that
are accessible to people with disability. The NDIA continues to provide accessible online
content, including published data, to assist people with disabilities to actively participate in
society and enable better information design outcomes for all.

5. The committee recommends that the National Disability Insurance Agency, with
the Scheme Actuary and Board, review methods and approaches to managing the
financial sustainability of the scheme to ensure appropriate emphasis is placed on
measuring the benefits of the scheme and promoting these benefits to the broader
Australian community.

Supported

The Australian Government notes the NDIS Review provides an opportunity to improve the
effectiveness of the NDIS to achieve outcomes for participants and be sustainable so that future
generations can also benefit from the NDIS.

The NDIA is committed to facilitating improved outcomes of economic and. social
independence and delivering a quality service for participants and their families, carers and
providers. Since the inception of the NDIS, the NDIA has been gathering data to better
understand how the scheme is making a difference and using this data to identify areas where
improvements may be needed. The NDIA will continue to develop a robust evidence base to
empower participants to make informed decisions about the best ways to spend their supports.

6. The committee recommends that the Australian Government and Disability
Ministers commission independent research into the broader contribution of the
National Disability Insurance Scheme to the Australian economy, including
research into measuring the economic benefits of the scheme.

Supported

The Australian Government recognises the significant benefits of the scheme to participants
and the wider community, including its significant contributions to the Australian economy.

The Australian Government notes the NDIS Review will consider the effectiveness and
sustainability of the scheme, including the achievement of meaningful participant employment
and lifetime outcomes and broader social and economic benefits, through the provision of
reasonable and necessary supports.

ee A ee ee lle OC
- foe ee =a a
i LS Le od ee 2 Lk. —
i ee ee == == -_ =
= =
a ee ee Oe = 7] oe 7] 7]
ae = eee = oe ee re = = =
ee ee ie "1 ee =."

2 ees ee ea OE = =:
